+++
title = "3 Ruben counter"
+++

III. Dr. Ruben on the Critical Edition of the Mahabharata[^259_A_*]

I am bound to form and express an opinion on the issues raised in the article "Schwierigkeiten der Textkritik des Mahābhārata" published in the current issue of the *Acta Orientalia* (vol. 8, pp. 240-256), in which the author, Dr. Walter RUBEN of the University of Bonn, has reviewed Fascicules 1-3 of my edition of the Adiparvan, criticizing at considerable length and in great detail the principles underlying the preparation of the edition and the constitution of the text. 

From his discursive remarks it is indeed hazardous to say what precise opinion RUBEN has formed of the critical edition. But it seems to me that his general verdict is anything but favourable. 

It is not my intention to scrutinize every statement of the writer and answer all his queries and criticisms; nor is it incumbent on me to do so; nor even necessary, as will appear from the sequel. I shall confine my remarks to a few points of outstanding importance in RUBEN's paper which might mislead the casual reader, creating an erroneous impression regarding the value of the results achieved by the critical edition. 

* 

## *The Bogey of Classical Philology*

At the beginning of his paper (p. 241), the learned reviewer from Bonn formally recites the canon of the *caturvarga* of the Classical Philologist. The Classical Philology, we are explained, distinguishes: 1. Heuristics, i.e. assembling and arranging the entire material consisting of MSS. and *testimonia* in the form of a genealogical tree; 2. *Recensio*, i.e. restoration of the text of the archetype; 3. *Emendatio,* i.e. restoration of the text of the author; 4. "Higher Criticism," i.e. separation of the sources utilized by the author.[^259_A_1] 

unnecessarily, minor emendations in 13 instances[^260_A_1] in about 3800 stanzas; that is, on an average 1 emendation in a little under 300 stanzas. R. has not taken any notice of my conjectural corrections; I take it that he approves of them. I feel greatly flattered, I must confess, by R.'s (implied) suggestion that I should have gone in more systematically and vigorously for emendation. Most scholars will, I fancy, be sincerely grateful that I have been so moderate and that I have declared it as my policy to give preference to interpretation over emendation.[^260_A_2]—In speaking at all of "Higher Criticism" (No. 4 on the programme) in this connection, R. seems to show a lamentable lack of understanding of the objective of the edition, having mistaken evidently the beginning for the end of the critical work on the Mahabharata. Higher Criticism can begin only after Lower Criticism has done its work, and not until then. And our critical edition is just laying the foundation of the Lower Criticism of the Great Epic. [[P261]] But I imagine, R. does not want to say anything special at all, when he mentions his "Höhere Kritik". In the 1833 slokas of the constituted text (= 2161 of the Bombay edition and 2208 of the Calcutta edition) so closely investigated by R. in the preparation of his erudite paper, he does not mention even a single passage where the "Höhere Kritik" could have earnestly and usefully "functioned". The item is probably introduced here merely *pro forma,* as the fourth and last stage of the *ariya-magga*. 

But R. might have mercifully spared us this learned *prooemium* on the aims and methods of the Classical Philology and their application to the problem of the Mahābhārata textual criticism. The same thing has been said by others before R., more simply but with ample clearness and emphasis. In the paper he read at the XVIIth International Congress of Orientalists (Oxford 1928), WINTERNITZ remarked: "The general principles followed in critical editions of classical texts, Greek or Latin or Sanskrit, can be applied to a critical edition of the Mahabharata only with great limitations and modifications. It is simply impossible to trace a genealogical tree of all the MSS, of the Adiparvan, and only in some cases are we able to state how MSS. are related to one another. On the whole, we have to be satisfied with a classification of the MSS. according to script, and the provinces to which they belong. And we have more often to refer to classes of MSS., than to textual criticism which are derived from a study of classical (Greek and Latin) texts and which depend ultimately upon there being a more or less complete concatenation of copies and exemplars reaching finally back to a single authentic (written) archetype ". 

And how would it be possible to apply to the Mahabharata the canons of the Classical Philology in *toto*? Where has the Classical Philology, I should like to know, the necessary experience of dealing with a text with about a dozen recensions whose extreme types differ in extent by something like 13,000 stanzas (or 26,000 lines); a work which for centuries has been growing not only upwards and downwards but also laterally, like the Nyagrodha tree, growing on all sides; a codex which has been written in seven or eight different scripts, assiduously and lovingly copied through a long vista of centuries by a legion of devout—and perhaps mostly ignorant[^228_2_A] and inefficient—copyists speaking different tongues; a traditional book of inspiration which, in various shapes and sizes, has been the cherished heritage of one people continuously for several millennia and which to the present day is interwoven with the thoughts and beliefs and moral ideas of a nation numbering over two hundred million? No, the Classical Philology has no experience in dealing with a text of this description, a work of such colossal dimensions and complex character, with such a long and intricate history behind it. That is why I have elsewhere also said that the problem of the Mahabharata textual criticism is a problem *sui generis*.[^228_3_A] The method of the Mahabharata textual criticism must be evolved from a special study of the Mahabharata manuscripts and of the Mahabharata manuscript tradition. Its results and achievements can be judged only by a standard of its own. 

[^259_A_*]: \[*ABORI* 11. 259-283\].
[^259_A_1]: R. has inadvertently omitted the mention of the 23 Devanagari MSS. in the description of my critical apparatus; cf. *op. cit.* p. 241, lines 3-6 from the bottom.
[^260_A_1]: In the first 86 adhyāyas, the following stanzas contain conjectural readings: 1. 14. 15; 30. 7; 37. 10; 41. 5; 45. 15; 48. 9; 51. 8; 57. 20; 68. 25; 71. 36; 84. 3, 13; 86. 5.
[^260_A_2]: Cf. Foreword to Fasc. 1, p. vi, column 2.
[^261_1_A]: *Indol. Prag.* vol. 1 (1929), pp. 58-68.
[^228_2_A]: The critical note on 1. 85. 20 mentions an instance whether the scribe (of $K_1$) has first copied the reverse of the folio of his exemplar and then the obverse!
[^228_3_A]: See my "Epic Studies I" (*JBBRAS*. vol. 4), p. 157.

## *RUBEN'S Exaggerations and Generalizations*

In his endeavour to maintain consistently an attitude of dogmatic doubt, R. has been unconsciously led to make wild exaggerations and rash generalizations, which such a meticulous and captious critic as R. should have taken pains to avoid. 

Thus in one place (p. 242), R. observes that the Sarada MS., as a matter of fact, does not differ at all from other MSS.! As a matter of fact, this statement of R. is demonstrably false. If a difference of something like 1000 stanzas (which is probably the difference between the Sārada and the [[P229]] Grantha versions of the Adiparvan), not to speak of innumerable minor variants, is no difference, I should like to know what, in the opinion of R., would constitute difference. Did R. expect that the Kaśmīrī Mahabharata would be a poem of 8800 slokas in Old Prakrit in which Kṛṣṇa was still a tribal hero? 

On p. 253, R. remarks that *every* contextual criterion is problematic.[^229_1_A] This is a rash generalization. In the Editorial Note (3) appended to Fascicule 4, I have now pointed out (p. ii f.) three passages for which there is the strongest intrinsic probability, amounting to certainty, that they are interpolations in the recension in which they are found. All three are instances in which according to the Northern recension the parties to be married were united only by a shadowy and clandestine form of marriage known as the Gandharva-vivāha, which is no marriage at all, while according to the Southern recension (respectively, in one case, the Grantha version only) the same parties were married, so to say, in church, in due form, with great pomp and ceremony. I maintain that at least in these three instances the criterion of the intrinsic probability is not at all problematic. I challenge R. to prove the contrary. 

I shall mention only one other interesting instance of intrinsic probability. In the Paulomaparvan, Ruru, while praying for the life of his wife, who has just died from the bite of a venomous serpent, says (1. 9. 4-5): 

> "If I have (practised) charity, (if I have) practised penance, if I have duly served (my) Gurus, then on account of that (merit of these virtuous acts) let my beloved be restored to life! As from (the moment of) my birth I have restrained myself and maintained my vows, so let the beautiful Pramadvarā even now arise!" 

The fulfilment of Ruru's fervent utterance is thought to be due merely to the efficacy of his pious acts in the past: they by themselves operate as a charm or spell to restore to life the dead Pramadvarā. This is a form of an "impersonal" prayer belonging to a comparatively older stratum of religious life and thought, which would never occur to an ordinary interpolator. At this place, $G_{1.2.4.5}$ have some additional lines including the following prayer (233\*): 

> "If my faith in Krsna, Viṣṇu, Hṛṣīkeśa, the Lord of the Worlds, the Foe of the Asuras, [[be]] unshakable, then let this beloved of mine be restored to life!" 

This belongs to a later stratum, the period of the Bhakti cult. This is just the thing that would be interpolated by a devout Vaisnava, to whom the former prayer would be meaningless and unintelligible. 

I maintain that here also the intrinsic probability as to what is original problematic?[^230_1_A] Scores of illustrations of this character may be produced where the contextual evidence is not problematic at all, but quite definite and conclusive. 

R. (p. 254) has magnanimously set the seal of his approval on "Die Sage von Rṣyasṛṅga" by Professor LÜDERS,[^230_2_A] citing it approvingly as a piece of investigation that belongs to the coveted domain of *emendatio*. It is unquestionably that. Had R. now thought over the question a little more deeply than he appears to have done, he would have easily perceived that the whole thesis of "Die Sage von Rṣyaśṛṅga" rests on the exploitation of intrinsic probability. There was, in fact, nothing else except the vulgate text before Prof. LÜDERS when he framed his brilliant hypothesis about the different strata and the cross-currents in the Mahabharata version of that legend. If now *every* contextual criterion is so very problematic, then what is the value, may I ask, of Prof. LÜDERS's monograph, which R. professes to admire so fervently? R. has been contradicting himself in one and the same paragraph (p. 253 f.). 

Theoretically considered also, R.'s proposition is untenable. When a text has been tampered with *on* a large *scale,* however careful and however accomplished the interpolator may be, it is inconceivable that all the frills, patches and paddings added by the interpolator should remain for all time incapable of detection. It is inevitable that the interpolator should bungle something somewhere, produce a misfit, leave raw edges which do not meet. Therefore R.'s dictum (p. 253) "ebenso problematisch ist schliesslich *jedes* inhaltliche Kriterium" is, in the form in which he has put it, fundamentally wrong and is to be unhesitatingly rejected. 

Here is another instance of R.'s misstatements. On p. 242 he observes that among the fifty MSS. collated for the Adiparvan considerably. The same is the case with the three Nilakantha MSS. The MSS. of the text as fixed by commentators (like Arjunamiśra and Nilakantha) are, in general, as like as two peas. The number of such replicas can be increased almost indefinitely. I have intentionally restricted their number to the minimum necessary for fixing the text of the respective versions, always giving preference to a divergent type. But even apart from such texts with commentaries, there is considerable similarity and kinship to be noticed among the different MSS. 

In the Editorial Note (2) appended to Fascicule 3 (p. ii), I have demonstrated the kinship between $S_1$ and $K_1$. I pointed out there that "the India Office codex must be a transcript not merely of a Śāradā codex, but, as a careful comparison with $S_1$ would show, of an exemplar very closely allied to *our* Sarada codex". This conclusion is supported by numerous other agreements throughout the Adiparvan. That the three new Malayalam MSS. $M_{5.7.8}$ again go back to the same original follows not merely from the numerous readings these MSS. have in common, but conspicuously from one particular mistake where they *repeat* inconsequentially, at the same point, a fragment of a stanza (1. 85. 25): *pūjayantīha loke nāsādhavaḥ.* Further the four Grantha MSS. $G_{1.2.4.5.}$ (which will come up for detailed discussion below) must go back to a not very distant common original. This group has not only numerous readings in common, but it contains quite a considerable number of interpolations peculiar to itself. Their close affinity is, however, placed beyond the pale of reasonable doubt by the fact that they all contain a stanza (294\*) interpolated at a place where it is, as will presently be shown, so thoroughly irrelevant that with it the passage does not construe even\! 

It will thus be seen that these generalizations of R. are absolutely unwarranted. They appear to have been introduced by R. merely for the satisfaction of having made some pointed and effective little statement. 

[^229_1_A]: Cf. also RUBEN, *op. cit.* p. 244.
[^230_1_A]: For instance, it is on grounds of intrinsic probability that Prof. LÜDERS (*DLZ*. Heft 24, Sp. 1142 f.) decides for and defends the reading *amṛtam* of the constituted text (1. 1. 201). Here the documentary evidence is inconclusive, but Prof. LÜDERS is on that account in no doubt as to which the true reading is.
[^230_2_A]: *Nachr. d. Ges. d. Wiss. z. Göttingen*, 1897, pp. 87ff.
[^231_1]: See infra p. 273.

## *The Four Types of Variants*

After pointing out that no pedigree of the Mahabharata MSS. is possible, R. proceeds (p. 243) to consider the different types of characteristic combinations among the variants, whose consideration must take the place of the formation of the usual genealogical tree. He distinguishes four different types of constellations. They are as follows: 1. *Complete Agreement*, where the two recensions N and S register one concordant reading; 2. *No Agreement*, where N and S stand opposite to each other with two divergent readings; 3. *Cross-Agreement*, where a part of N agrees with a part of S against the rest of N, which latter agrees with the rest of S; 4. *Partial Agreement*, where a part of N stands against S and the rest of N (or *vice versa*). 

[[P232]] Diagrammatically the four types of constellations may be represented thus. 

* **Type No. 1: Complete Agreement:** $N = S$
* **Type No. 2: No Agreement:** $N \quad S$
* **Type No. 3: Cross-Agreement:** $N_1 \quad S_2 \quad / \quad N_2 \quad S_1$
* **Type No. 4: Partial Agreement:** $N_1 \quad S \quad / \quad N_2$

Type No. 1 ($N=S$). In this case I have assumed that the concordant reading of N and S must be postulated as having already belonged to the archetype. To my proposition R. adds the rider that there is a possibility that even such a concordant reading (or feature) might have been an innovation made in one recension and then borrowed in *toto* by the other recension. He cites (p. 244) Rāmāyaṇa, Ayodhya 6 (Bombay ed.), which (according to R.) is an interpolation in one recension, which had been borrowed *en bloc* by the other (independent) recension. R.'s proposition would be a contradiction in terms; only he takes care not to put forward the proposition in this form. 

If the two recensions N and S of the Mahabharata should have an interpolation in common, they would not be (truly) independent. But these recensions must be assumed to be independent, and R. would not be able to prove any "secondary interrelationship" between N as a whole and S as a whole, at least for the Adiparvan. Should there be found a passage which stands in such an apparent disagreement with the context that it may (*a priori*) be regarded as an interpolation, it would be no more difficult—in fact it would be, in my opinion, far easier and much more natural—to assume that the contradiction was already present in the "archetype," before the bifurcation of the recensions than to premise that one independent recension had borrowed it from another independent recension. 

For example, adhyayas 1 and 4 of the Adiparvan begin with the identical sentence, depicting the identical situation, that the Sūta approaches the Rṣis assembled in the Naimiṣa forest at the twelve-year sacrificial session of Saunaka. This implies that a new beginning is made at adhyaya 4, totally ignoring whatever has gone before it in the text as it now stands. Both passages occur with minimal variations in both recensions.[^232_1] It is evident that this double beginning (adhy. 1 and 4), as we find it in our version of the Mahābhārata, was not conceived and depicted by one and the same poet. But it does not at all follow therefore that the interpolation was first made in one recension of our text and was subsequently borrowed by the other from this recension. There are various possibilities. Perhaps both versions of the beginning lay before the diaskeuasts of the last redaction of the Mahabharata: one giving the very useful table of contents, the other containing some interesting old tales of gods, Rṣis and serpents. They were not consistent in juxtaposition, but each was too good to lose. The redactors put both in, making but a poor compromise. This is one possibility. The other possibility is that one of these sections was composed and tacked on to an existing version of the beginning by the diaskeuasts of the last redaction themselves, using the same opening device. That would only show—as R. himself concedes in another connection (p. 254)—that though we might regard the original epic as a more or less homogeneous [[P228]] work, the archetype of our MSS. already contained some inconsistencies and contradictions.[^228_1_A] 

Type No. 2 ($N \quad S$). I agree with R. that when there is a conflict between N and S and they stand opposite to each other with two divergent readings, no definite decision is, in general, possible as to which is the original; the versions should *a priori* be placed on an equal footing and treated with impartiality. Accordingly, in such cases, I have adopted as stop-gap the reading of N, placing a wavy line below it, to show that the reading is uncertain.[^228_2_A] R. mentions an exception to this procedure of mine, but the exception is only apparent. R. has failed to understand my motives in departing from my usual practice in the solitary instance of the benedictory stanza with which the epic begins (*Nārāyaṇaṃ namaskṛtya* etc.). I have printed it above the line not because it is found in $K_{o.1}$ or in $K_5$ or even in N, but simply as a *maṅgala*. I am aware that the stanza is missing in S. There is, therefore, every probability that it did not belong to the archetype. I am also fully aware that the stanza is a characteristic mark of the works of the Bhāgavata sect and not peculiar to the Mahabharata.[^228_3_A] There is, however, the fact that all our MSS. of the Adiparvan begin with some benedictory stanza. These stanzas have probably usurped now the place of some simpler mangala with which the epic once began. No orthodox Hindu work can begin without a mangala; and this edition of the Mahabharata, critical though it be, is and remains a Hindu work, which could not dispense with [[P269]] a mangala. My recognition of the unoriginal character of the stanza is, however clearly implied by the fact that I have omitted to give the stanza a number, differing in this respect conspicuously from the earlier editions, which treat it as the first stanza of the epic and an integral part of the text. 

[^232_1]: Cf. HOLTZMANN, *Das Mahābhārata*, 2. 12.
[^228_1_A]: For instance, the story of the birth of Bhisma contains a patent contradiction. The reason why the Vasus were cursed by Vasistha as given in adhy. 91 (= 96 of the Bombay text) is quite different from and inconsistent with that given in adhy. 93 (= 99 of the Bombay text). Both versions occur, in substantially identical form, in both recensions. Cf. also the passage regarding the eight forms of marriage (1. 67. 8-12) in the Sakuntala episode. The passage is made up of two different and mutually inconsistent systems of rules, taken from two different sources. 11cd and 12ab have been borrowed from a context which mentions only five forms of marriages; cf. (K.) 13. 79. 9 and DAHLMANN, *Das Mahabharata* pp. 203 ff. The same passage, with some variation, but with the same inconsistency, occurs in Manu (3. 21-26).
[^228_2_A]: See my "Epic Studies I" (*JBBRAS*. Vol. 4), p. 163.
[^228_3_A]: BÜHLER, *Indian Studies*, 2. 4 (footnote 2).

## *The Position of $G_{1.2.4.5}$.*

One of the most perplexing forms of variation in the Mahabharata text is Type No. 4, namely, Partial Agreement. The critical apparatus is a veritable labyrinth of complicated and intermingled versions, each with a long and intricate history of its own behind it. We have unfortunately no single thread to guide us out of the maze, but rather a multitude of strands intertwined and entangled and leading along divergent paths. How difficult it is to find one's way in this maze may be realized from the fact that so painstaking and able a critic as R., despite his close and conscientious study of the critical apparatus, could totally lose his bearings the moment the network gets a little more complicated than usual. 

The really perplexing part of the whole tangle is that while the agreements of $S_1$ $K_1$ with S are mostly authentic and fundamental, those of $G_{1.2.4.5}$ with N are mostly secondary and spurious. Let us first consider the position of the group $G_{1.2.4.5.}$ which appears to have caused R. most trouble. I shall state the case as it has been put forward by R. himself (p. 249 f.). 

*Suparṇādhyāya* 19 contains a conversation of Garuda with his father Kasyapa. Garuda introduces himself as *patatāṃ variṣṭha* and makes some polite inquiries regarding his father (*kaccid vas tāta kuśalaṃ gṛheṣu*) and his mother (*kaccit... mātā na śocati*). The father replies that they are doing well at home (*vedāham etat kuśalaṃ gṛheṣu*) and then pronounces a blessing on Garuda (*...tvā rakṣatu... ṛco yajuṃṣi*; then *svastyayanam*). This conversation assumes in the Mahabharata (1. 25. 7-25) the following form. Garuda asks his father for some new and substantial food and the father recommends the mammoth elephant and tortoise (as in *Suparṇa* 13. 1 f. Garuda's mother does) and proceeds to relate their history. In this scene the contents of the *Suparṇ.* are to be found in the "interpolated" verses (here adapted to the new contents). In the beginning (324\*: $K_{0.3.4}$ Ñ $V_1$ BD $T_1$), the father asks Garuda if he is doing well "in respect of food"[^270_1] (*kaccid vaḥ kuśalaṃ [[P270]] nityam bhojane*); the three lines of this N interpolation (says R.) correspond to the equally long S interpolation (326\*: $G_{1.2.4.5}$), in which Garuda introduces himself as *patatāṃ śreṣṭha*. In both these N and S groups there follows a common interpolation (327\*) in which Garuda says that his mother is well (*mātā me kuśalā*), etc. At the end of the scene follows in these MSS. (N $V_1$ B D $T_1$ $G_{1.2.4.5}$ in $K_2$ only partly) the blessings of the father (335\* *....svastyayanam... ṛco yajuṃṣi*). 

Garuda has stolen the Amṛta; Indra hurls at him his Vajra; Garuda shows his strength and drops just one feather (Mbh. 1. 29. 19 = *Suparṇ.* 27. 6). Mbh. 1. 29. 23 is similar to *Suparṇ.* 28. 2 (Indra then tries to make friends with Garuda); *Suparṇ.* 28. 3 is similar to Mbh. 1. 30. 4 ff. (Garuda boasts about his great strength).[^270_2] In *Suparṇ.* 28. 1 it is narrated that out of Garuda's feather, which had split in three parts (*chinnaṃ tridhā tat kuliśena patram*), there sprang the peacock, the "two-mouthed serpent-lords" and the mongoose. The last three padas of this stanza are interpolated at this place in $K_{0.4}$ (358\*); the first finds an echo in 361\*, an interpolation of $T_2$ $G_{1.2.4.5}$ (*tridhā kṛtvā tadā vajram*). $K_o$ has then further actually cited *verbatim Suparṇ.* 28. 3 in 365\*. 

R. admits that in the *second* scene $K_{0.4}$ unquestionably cite *Suparṇ.* Further 361\*, according to R. again, is to be judged similarly. That is an interpolation in the S MSS., the same stanza of the *Suparṇ.* (28. 1) having hovered before the eyes of the interpolators as in the case of those who interpolated 358\* in $K_{0.4}$. After pointing out all this R. asks: "Should one now regard the first scene also as an interpolation made independently in N and S? Consider that $G_{1.2.4.5}$ agree quite frequently in this episode with N (1. 20. 15; 301\*; 329\*; 343\*), that they alone have a remarkably large number of interpolations, and that 340\* is found only $G_{1.2.4.5}$ M and corresponds to *Suparṇ.* 13. 4.... Has the G group then [[P271]] interpolated the passage under the influence of the *Suparṇ.* and in its turn influenced the N groups? SU[KTHANKAR] gives in 1. 20. 1 the diametrically opposite answer with an assurance which is out of place in such difficult passages. It cannot even be strictly proved that these "interpolations"[^271_1] in the first scene, which are common to N and S, are not an old remnant of the archetype." 

There are in the Adiparvan far more complicated passages than this: this is one of the simpler complications. I shudder at the thought of what R. would have done if he had to handle one of the really difficult cases of conflation.[^271_2] In the present case, it can, as it happens, be *strictly* proved that the doubtful passages of the first scene, which are common to certain N groups and S groups, are interpolations and no rest of the archetype. Also I may repeat here most emphatically what I have said in the note on 1. 20. 1 that the irrelevant insertion of 294\* in $G_{1.2.4.5}$ is *irrefutable* evidence of the contamination of these four Grantha MSS. from late Northern sources. 

We shall consider the second point first. I imagine, R. has misunderstood or overlooked the little word "irrelevantly" in my note on 1. 20. 1. Otherwise he would have tried to visualize the passage, by reconstructing it carefully from the critical notes, and then he would have surely come to the same conclusion as I. All that is necessary in order to prove that 294\* *is* an interpolation in the Grantha group is to cite the passage in *extenso*. Here is a transcript of the passage as it is found in $G_2$, the better preserved of the two Grantha MSS. belonging to the Bombay Government collection, collated for the Adiparvan. 

[[P272]] **App. I, No. 13:**  
> नागास्तु सहिताः कृत्वा कर्तव्यमिति तद्वचः ।  
> विस्नेहा विदन्माता ह्यसंप्राप्तमनोरथा ।  
> प्रसन्ना भोक्षयेदस्मान्तस्माच्छापाच्च भामिनी ।  
> कृष्णं पुच्छं करिष्यामस्तुरगस्य महात्मनः ।  
> तथति तस्य ते तस्य कृष्णवाला इव स्थिताः ।  

[5] 

**294\*:**  
> एतस्मिन्नन्तरे ते तु पत्न्यौ वै पणिते तदा ।  
> महासत्त्ववलोपेतः शशिवत् द्योतयन्दिशः ।  
> कामरूपः कामगमः कामरूपो वियत्तमः ।  

**1. 20. 1:**  
> तं समुद्रमविक्रम्य कद्रूर्विनतया सह ।  
> न्यपततुरगाभ्याशे न चिरादिव शीघ्रगा ।  

[10] 

**2:**  
> निशाम्य च बहून्वालान्कृष्णान्पुच्छमुपाश्रितान् ।  
> विनतां विषण्णवदनां कद्दूर्दास्ये न्ययोजयत् ।  

Even a cursory reading of the passage will show that lines 7-8 of this passage (which constitute 294\*) are *thoroughly* irrelevant here. The lines comprise merely a string of attributes of Garuda. There is no finite verb in the sentence and there is no reference to Garuda in the foregoing or following lines. The only *rational* explanation of this state of things is that the lines were interpolated in an ancestor of $G_{1.2.4.5}$ by a clumsy copyist, who had missed the right place by four stanzas. Such mistakes occur frequently in Indian MSS. because the additional lines were, as a rule, first written in the narrow margin of the MS. and a small mark was made to indicate the point of insertion. Should the mark get obliterated, the lines would be inserted by the next copyist wherever he considered they belonged or fitted best. If those lines (294\*) belonged to the archetype of our MSS. we should have to assume that they were accidentally mis-placed in a sub-group of the Grantha version, omitted (for an unknown reason) in another group of MSS. $K_{1.3}$ $D_2$ $T_{3.6}$ M and are found in their correct place only in $K_{0.2.4}$ Ñ $V_1$ B D (except $D_2$). Is this plausible? I can hardly think that R. would say so. 

I am inclined to believe that R. had failed to realize how the passage actually read in this particular sub-group of the Grantha version. Taking all things into consideration, it is difficult to escape from the conclusion that an ancestor of the Grantha sub-group had been compared with some MS. or MSS. of the Northern recension which contained the spurious passage 294\*. This is the first important fact to remember with regard to this interesting sub-group of the Grantha version. It is quite in harmony with indiscriminate additions. *This noteworthy fact renders its agreements with N immediately suspect.* And *a priori* also it is more likely that, when there is agreement between a sub-group of one version and some entirely different version or versions, the sub-group is the borrower. It may further be pointed out that 294\* is by a long way not the only passage which this sub-group of the Grantha version shares with the vulgate text, against the rest of the Grantha version together with the Sarada-Kaśmiri and the Malayalam versions. Here is a list of these passages (in adhyāyas 20-43), which must all be assumed to be interpolated in the sub-group in question under the influence of some MS. or MSS. on which the text of the vulgate is based, that is, of some late Northern sources: 294\*, 301\*, 307\*, 327\*, 329\*, 335\*, 341\*, 343\*, 355\*, 385\*, 392\*, 393\*, 396\*, 402\*, 411\*, 419\*, etc. 

After this preamble we may proceed to consider the case of the *Suparṇ.* passage. Here the indebtedness of $G_{1.2.4.5}$ to the Northern recension is equally clear and would have been manifest to R., had he but attempted to visualize the whole passage as it stands in the sub-group instead of contenting himself with merely counting the number of lines. R.'s initial mistake lies in thinking that 324\* and 326\* are equivalent passages, whereas the passages, although of the same length and inserted at the same point, are utterly different in contents and have an entirely different significance. The passage 324\* [[P274]] contains a *kuśala*-question and an inquiry as to whether Garuda gets enough to eat; 326\*, on the other hand, contains a question as to where Garuda is going in such hurry! Remembering this and reading the various passages together, the relationship between the MSS. will be clear. It is again a case of *irrelevant* insertion in the conflated group. The passage in question reads in the different MS. groups as under. 

$K_{0.3.4}$ Ñ $V_1$ B D $T_1$ (*7ab* and 324\*): 

> ततोऽपश्यत्स पितरं पृष्ठश्चाख्यातवान्पितुः ।  
> यथान्यायममेयात्मा तं चोवाच महानृषिः ।  

(काश्यप उवाच ।) 

> कच्चिद्रः कुशलं नित्यं भोजने बहुलं सुत ।  
> कच्चिच्च मानुषे लोके तवान्नं विद्यते बहु ।  

$K_{0.3.4}$ $G_{1.2.4.5}$ (*7ab* and 326\*): 

> ततोऽपश्यत्स पितरं काश्यपं दीप्ततेजसम् ।  
> ववन्दे पततां श्रेष्ठो ब्रह्म ब्रह्मविदां प्रभुम् ।  
> पृष्टश्च पित्रा बलवान्वैनतेयः प्रतापवान् ।  

(काश्यप उवाच ।) 

> क्व गन्तासीति वेगेन मम त्वं वक्तुमर्हसि ।  

N $V_1$ B D $T_1$ $G_{2.4.5}$ (327\*): 

(गरुड उवाच ।) 

> माता में कुशल शश्वत्तथा भ्राता तथा ह्यहम् ।  
> न हि मे कुशलं तात भोजने बहुले सदा ।  

Placed in this way, the reader will see at a glance that while 327\* is a proper rejoinder to the query in 324,\* it is totally irrelevant after 326\*; because in $G_{2.4.5}$, in reply to Kasyapa's question where Garuda is going, Garuda says "My mother is well, so is my brother, and so am I" etc. This clearly shows that in $G_{2.4.5}$, 327\* is a *secondary* interpolation. Then the question arises whether 326\* could be a rest of the archetype. The probability of this being so is reduced to nil not merely by the fact that the passage is found only in the highly inflated group $G_{1.2.4.5}$, but also from the noteworthy circumstances (which I fear has escaped the vigilant R.) that in [[P275]] $G_{1.2.4.5}$, *7ab* has been altered from *prṣṭaś cākhyātavān pituḥ* to *Kāśyapaṃ dīptatejasam* in order to accommodate the additional lines. In any case these interpolations are *not* common to N and S, as erroneously believed by R. 

The history of these interpolations must be something like the following. The question (which is missing in S except $T_1$) and the answer (which is found only in $T_1$ $G_{2.4.5}$ of the S MSS.) regarding Garuda's gastronomic requirements (324\* and 327\*) were interpolated in a part of N (namely, the base of the vulgate), inspired by *Suparṇ.* 19. 2. Independently there was inserted in $G_{1.2.4.5}$ a question by Kasyapa ("Where are you going with such speed?") in anticipation of the reply of Garuda in 1. 25. 7 *cd,* an interpolation which probably has nothing to do with the *Suparṇ.* Subsequently, after comparison with some MS. or MSS. of the N recension, the answer of Garuda 327\* (which, as I have remarked above, fits only to the question in 324\*) was irrelevantly added in an ancestor of $G_{1.2.4.5}$ by an ignorant copyist after 326\*, where it does not fit in the least! This *second* mistake of the copyist of an ancestor of $G_{1.2.4.5}$ *is* another valuable piece of *irrefutable* evidence of the contamination of these four G MSS. from some late Northern source. 

I have remarked above that the mangalya or svastyayana (335\*) before 1. 25. 26 must also be regarded as an interpolation. This follows for one thing from the MS. evidence, and is corroborated by the fact that the words of the sūta *sa tac chrutvā pitur vākyam* refer clearly to Kasyapa's directions as to what Garuda should next do and ignore the intervening the long mangalya altogether. That is why the vulgate alters *śrutvā* to *smṛtvā*\! 

The reader need be not sceptical about the possibilities of such indiscriminate conflation and addition. The critical apparatus, if closely scrutinized and properly understood, will reveal numerous instances of a similar character. Even a close study of the Kumbhakonam edition, prepared in our own times by two excellent Southern Pandits, will throw some light on the mentality of the old redactors of the Mahabharata: parallel and even contradictory versions are placed quite unconcernedly side by side, regardless of the effect on the reader, regardless of the fact that sentences are left hanging in the air, that passages do not construe. Here one notices above all the anxiety that nothing that was by any chance found in a Mahabharata MS. should be lost. Everything was carefully preserved, assembled in a picturesque disarray. The guiding principle was to make the Mahabharata a "thesaurus of all excellences," culled no matter from what source. At the beginning of his commentary on the Sanatsujātīya, Nilakantha naively remarks:[^276_A_1] 

> उद्योगपर्वणि सनत्सुजातीये भाष्यकारादिभिर्व्याख्यातान्संप्रतितन पुस्तकेषु च स्थितान्पाठान् श्लोकांश्च गुणोपसंहारन्यायेनैकीकृत्य व्याख्यायते ।  

[[P276]] That is why it is safe to assume that far more stanzas must have been added to the Great Epic than omitted from it. It follows from this as a corollary that the archetype must almost completely—if not quite completely—be contained in the extant MSS.[^277_A_1] 

It will thus be seen that the assurance with which I have spoken (in the note on 1. 20. 1) of the contamination of $G_{1.2.4.5}$ from late Northern sources is amply justified; and that the passages common to this sub-group and the vulgate text (324\*, 326\*, 327\*) mentioned by R. are in fact interpolations and no remnants of the archetype. 

[^270_1]: This is R.'s rendering ("fragt nach seinem Wohlergehen in Bezug auf das Essen"); but he has evidently misunderstood the line, which may be translated thus: "Have you (all) been doing well? (have you had) always plenty of food?".
[^270_2]: It is by no means certain that (as R. says, p. 249) the stanzas which are common to the Mbh. and the Suparn. have been borrowed by the Suparn. from the Mbh. I believe, on the contrary, that the Suparn, has to be looked upon here as the source from which the stanzas in question have been taken over by the epic. Four of the stanzas are nearly identical in the two works, because they occur as slokas in the Suparn, and could be utilized by the redactors of the epic version without change of metre and with some trifling change of language.
[^271_1]: R. means the passages which have been regarded as interpolations by me and excluded from the text.
[^271_2]: That would happen when the interpolation may have filled out a factitive lacuna or what looks like a lacuna in the archetype. Cf. the case discussed by BELLONI-FILIPPI in his paper in the next footnote.
[^272_A_1]: In the stimulating article entitled "L'episodio di Kadrū e d Vinatā nell' edizione critica del Mahabharata" (Traduzioni di epica indiana II) published in the Ascoli Memorial volume *Silloge* Linguistica (Torino 1930), F. BELLONI-FILIPPI justifies the excision of passage No. 13 of App. I (Bombay text 1. 22. 1-3), showing that the lacuna is only apparent and the *textus* simplicior is quite in order.
[^272_A_2]: Graphically there is no connection between the conflicting readings. The reading of the vulgate is found in only one MS. of the K group ($K_2$), an inferior conflated MS. It will thus be seen that the MS. evidence is utterly confused. That being so, I have adopted the reading *śāsanam*, giving preference to the side on which the majority of K stand, according to a principle enunciated in the Foreword to Fascicule 1 (p. vii).
[^276_A_1]: Cf. Udyoga 42. See also TELANG, *Sacred Books of the East*, vol. 8, p. 203 f.; and WINTERNITZ, *Ind. Ant.* 27 (1898). 128.
[^277_A_1]: Cf. RUBEN, *op. cit.* p. 245.

## *The Position of K.*

If I understand R. (v. 248, lines 1-3)—his remarks are somewhat confused—he questions the propriety of my treating the concordant readings of the Southern recension and the Kaśmīrī (Sāradā) version (against the rest of N) as original readings. But in the course of the same paragraph, he expresses his unqualified approval of the procedure of Prof. LÜDERS in accepting as original the consensus of G and B (against the rest of N). Now, as a matter of documentary probability, there is no difference whatsoever between the consensus of K and S against B D on the one hand and the consensus of B and G against D on the other; because the relationship between the different versions must be one of the following type: 

```
                    Ur-Mahābhārata
                   /              \
                 *Ś (*K)           X (intermediate archetype)
                /                 / \
               N                *B   *D
                                 |    |
                                *T   *G
                                 \  /
                                  S
                                  |
                                 *M
```

where X is the intermediate archetype of the vulgate, and \*K, \*B, etc. are the (uncontaminated) archetypes of K, B, etc. 

presumed that he would likewise give preference to the consensus of K and S against B (with or without D). Let us see what Prof. LÜDERS himself has to say on the point:[^277_1_A] 

> "...Dagegen ist es sehr erfreulich zu hören, dass von Adhy. 26 an noch ein altes Sārada-Manuskript auf Birkenrinde zu Gebote steht, voraussichtlich der einzige vollkommen echte Vertreter der Kāśmiri-Version. 
> 
> "Das ist um so mehr zu begrüssen, als die Kaśmīrī-Version den relativ ältesten Text des Epos bietet. Mit keiner der übrigen nördlichen Versionen stimmen aber die südlichen Handschriften so genau überein wie mit der Kāśmiri-Version. Andererseits zeigt diese keine der offenkundigen Zusätze der südlichen Rezension. Die räumlich weite Getrenntheit der beiden Handschriftengruppen schliesst die direkte Abhängigkeit der südlichen Rezension von der Kāśmīrī-Version nahezu aus. *Es ist daher anzunehmen, dass da, wo die beiden in Lesarten zusammenstimmen, die Lesungen des ältesten Textes, der erreichbar ist, vorliegen. Zu dieser Beurteilung des Verhältnisses der Käśmiri und der südlichen Handschriften, die Sukthankar vertritt, war auch ich bereits bei der Herstellung der Druckprobe gelangt*, wenn mir auch von der Kāśmīrī-Version nur die ziemlich nachlässig geschriebene Handschrift der Bibliothek des India Office 2137 vorlag.... Selbstverständlich kann auch die Kāśmīri-Version Textänderungen enthalten, und der Herausgeber ist meines Erachtens im Rechte, wenn er gelegentlich der Bangālī-Version, mit der die Maithili-Version und der Text des Arjunamiśra im allgemeinen zusammengehen, da wo sie mit den südlichen Handschriften übereinstimmt, den Vorzug gegeben hat." 

Prof. LÜDERS, in other words, unhesitatingly endorses my procedure. Herr Dr. RUBEN dissents! I am content to leave it at that. 

## *The Extent of the Viraṭaparvan*

When I adopted 2050 as the figure[^278_1] representing the extent of the Virāṭaparvan, I did not do so, as R. says (p. 251), [[P278]] under the influence of UTGIKAR or anybody else. My chief reason for adopting the figure was that it represents the reading of the *majority* of K supported by the Maithili MS. ($V_1$) and Nilakantha version (Dn). When Nilakantha adopts it, there is a certain amount of probability of its being well represented in the old Northern MSS. of his time. I cannot say whether R. knows that it is the reading of *all* printed editions as well; it looks as though he does not. 

Now let us consider the claims of the other variants. S has an obviously inflated text. This inflated text appears to have been recounted in the South by the diaskeuasts and the Parvasamgraha figure altered accordingly to 3500.[^278_2] So the reading of S may be left out of consideration altogether. The other Northern variants are as follows: 

* **2015:** *श्लोकाः पंचदशैव तु* । $K_3$
* **2300:** *त्रीणि श्लोकशतानि च* । $K_1$ $V_{1m}$ $B_{2.3.4m}$ $D_{7.12.14}$
* **2500:** *पंच श्लोकशतानि च* । $B_1$ $D_2$
* **2550:** *तथा पंच शतानि च* । $K_o$ $B_1$ $D_{13}$
* **2550:** *श्लोकाः पंच शतानि च* । $Dr$ $D_o$

Only one thing that is plain in the midst of the prevailing confusion is that the text has been counted and the figure adjusted more than once. The *pañcadaśaiva* of $K_3$, however, is obviously only a corruption of *pañcāśad eva* of the text.[^278_3] Thus the text reading represents the reading of K except $K_{o.1}$. There is no adequate reason for giving preference here to the readings of $K_o$ or $K_1$, because they not only disagree among themselves, but each finds only desultory support from other Northern MSS. What could the editor do under these circumstances but leave the reading of the vulgate (supported by the majority of K) in possession and mark it as doubtful? The text figure appears, however, in a certain measure, to be supported and even made probable by the facts of the case; because there are in existence, as a matter of fact, a few MSS. of the *textus simplicior* (F A M)[^278_4]—and with the constantly operating [[P279]] urge towards inflation their number will be necessarily small—which are approximately of that length. 

The figure 2500, I must confess, I cannot adequately explain.[^279_1] But as regards 2300, which approximately represents the extent of the vulgate text and which is documented by $B_{2.3.4m}$ among others, one may hazard the guess that it represents the measure of the text of that section of the Bengali version in which the Kāli (or Durga) hymn had been first interpolated along with some other accretions. All things considered, I think I was perfectly justified in adopting in the Parvasamgraha the reading which I did adopt. 

What R. means by saying (p. 251) that the reading of the archetype might have been:[^279_2] 

> *सहस्रमेकं श्लोकानां सप्त श्लोकशतानि च ।* 

is beyond my comprehension. Does he mean that I should have set this (imaginary) line in the constituted text in place of the one which I have, or does he only want to show that he can compose an Anustubh line? If it is the latter, I will readily admit that the line is metrically, grammatically and stylistically impeccable, and does him credit. As we do not, however, want to rewrite the Mahabharata, such manufactured lines have no value for us. The only sound test of the correctness of a reading is the evidence [[P280]] of MSS. In overriding this evidence, R. is unguardedly opening wide the door to a subjective "Höhere Kritik", which is the only thing that we must rigorously avoid doing at this stage of the Mahabharata studies and which R. would be the first to deprecate if any one else were to attempt it. 

[^277_1_A]: *Deutsche Literaturzeitung*, 1930, Heft. 24, Sp. 1141.
[^278_1]: See my remarks in "Epic Studies II", pp. 188 ff. *supra,* on the value of the figures in the Parvasaṃgraha.
[^278_2]: See LÜDERS, "Ueber die Grantharecension des Mahābhārata", *Abh. d. Ges. d. Wiss. z. Göttingen*, 1901, p. 52.
[^278_3]: The only difference between $K_3$ and the text is that the former has *cadasai* for *casade* of the latter.
[^278_4]: UTGIKAR did not realize it, but I surmise that his F A M are also MSS. of the K version, that is, Devanagari transcripts of Sarada originals.
[^279_1]: I surmise that it is the extent of some composite text (like that prepared by the scholiast Ratnagarbha), comprising the vulgate text plus some interesting additions gleaned from the Southern recension.
[^279_2]: A line made up by R. on the basis of UTGIKAR'S statement that there are 1729 stanzas common to N and S.

## *Ruben constitutes the Text*

At the end of his paper R. has appended, as a specimen, the text of 3 stanzas (1. 26. 1-3), as it should be constituted. The reader who has waded through 15 pages of R.'s disquisition on the complicacies of the Mahabharata textual criticism will be amazed to discover that notwithstanding the over-whelming mass of variants and "additional" lines which stand at the [[P280]] disposal of the exacting critic and despite the alarming theoretical doubts and scruples expressed by R. in the earlier part of his paper, his constituted text differs from mine principally in the readings of two *akṣaras*, and the addition of a line which he himself subsequently (p. 256) admits to be a probable interpolation! The difference between our readings is as follows. In line 1 he *hesitatingly* sets *mātre*[^280_1] for my *mātrā,* and in line 3 *bhaṅktvā* for my *bhagnām*. R. (doubtfully) decides in favour of *mātre* on the ground that it is a *lectio difficilior* and according to R. himself—of course in another place (p. 253)—the criterion of the *lect. diff.* is problematic and proves nothing. Here is a neat little paradox: R. prefers the *lect. diff.* and sets it in the text, because the criterion of the *lect. diff.* is problematic and proves nothing!—As regards the second word, R. admits that though he prefers *bhaṅktvā,* the differentiation from (an original) *bhagnām* to *bhaṅktvā* may be an innovation (p. 256). 

The other difference in the text as constituted by R. and by me lies in the underlining of the uncertain parts of the text. Let me at once admit that I have been rather remiss in showing the uncertain portions in this passage. The device is a practical makeshift and by its very nature hard to apply strictly and consistently. But the difficulty is not solved by R.'s marking below the text wavy and straight, single and double lines, in season and out of season, as soon as he espies a variant in the critical apparatus. An edition prepared on R's plan would be indeed not critical but hypercritical. Even a constituted text is after all a text, meant to be read like any other text, and not a chart of the aberrations of careless copyists of the last two millennia. While it would be foolish to underline *bhagnām* (line 2) merely on the [[P281]] ground that three (inferior) MSS. $D_{3.6.7}$ read for it *lagnam*, which is obviously a clerical error, it is fatuous to underline text-words merely because some MS. or other has a divergent reading, as R. does in the case of *balīyasā* ($K_1$ *mahātmanā*), *sa tad-* ($G_1$ *sarṣiḥ*), *teṣām evā°* (Ñ *teṣāṃ caivā*), etc. 

With regard to the short explanatory notes (p. 255 f.) added by R. below the specimen of the text, I have to make the following comments. 

The participle *smayamāna* is not "episch", but *smayan* (of the text) may be, since the root *smi* is commonly used with middle endings.—The line 340\* being an interpolation (even R. admits, p. 256, the possibility of its being that), the *adhomukhān* of the text is opposed virtually only by the *avānmukhān* of the *two* Grantha MSS. $G_{5.6}$, because the remaining adverse MSS. ($G_{1.2.4.5}$ M), while trying to interpolate the Vaikhanasas (under the influence of *Suparṇ.* 13.4), have obviously altered the last foot of the line (*2d*);[^281_1] therefore the text reading *adhomukhān* is hundred per cent. certain and in need of no underlining, straight or wavy.—In view of the fact that 340\* is missing even in T $G_{3.6}$ and in regard to the general character of $G_{1.2.4.5}$ explained above, there cannot be the slightest doubt about the spuriousness of 340 \*; the line was probably first inserted in M and copied thence by the highly inflated group $G_{1.2.4.5}$.—The form *jagṛhe* is found only in five Devanagari and two Southern MSS. (one Malayalam and one Grantha). In old Devanagari MSS. (written with pṛṣṭhamātrās), *jagṛhe* would be all but indistinguishable from *jagrāha* of the text. So the reading of these Devanagari MSS. may be ignored in this case. The Bengali and the Southern MSS., which would carefully distinguish between the two words, have *jagrāha,* with two insignificant exceptions in the Southern recension. It is on that account that *jagrāha* was adopted in the text, and it is *not* doubtful.—*3ef* is certainly a third line, but is in spite of that quite certain. The line is not missing in any MS., and as for its reading there is agreement on all material points between all versions of both recensions. Thus K and S agree *completely* with each other as far as *e* is concerned, which is a very significant fact in its favour and should not be lightly ignored. The variations concern mainly *f*. The difficult *praviśātayan*, a *lect. diff.*, preserved only in K, was the cause of the remodelling of the pada in S and the vulgate. Of problematic. I would, however, hazard the conjecture that the way to the variant *pravicālayan* was virtually paved by the southern tendency to confuse the palatal sibilant (*ś*) and fricative (*c*): the successive steps in the corruption would be *pravasātayan*, corrupted to *\*vicātayan* and then "corrected" to *\*cālayan*. The *vināśayan* of $K_2$ $D_2$ is perhaps an original gloss; or (more probably) a wrong correction of an original mislection, the successive steps being *viśātayan*, *\*viśānayan* (*ta* and *na* being written almost alike in old Devanagari MSS), and *vināśayan*. The difficulty with the word *praviśātayan* may be realized when it is remembered that the Dhatupatha knows no root like *śat* or *śat*; it cites only *śad*\! 

RUBEN's long disquisition on the difficulties of the Mahabharata textual criticism boils down to this: only that portion of the text which is documented by both recensions, in identical terms, is *tolerably* certain; the rest is doubtful in varying degrees, there being no criterion whatsoever which can enable us to discriminate with complete confidence between the variants; even the concordance between K and S (against B D)[^282_1] is not conclusive evidence of the originality of the common reading. This is a more or less obvious standpoint, though partly erroneous and distinctly timid and conservative. It was hardly necessary for the "Referent" to write so much in order to say so little. His attitude of dogmatic doubt has caused him to make unwittingly some wild exaggerations and unwarranted generalizations as I have shown above. His perfunctory study of the manuscript evidence has led him occasionally to make gross blunders in the estimation of the relationship of the different manuscript groups and versions, some of which have been pointed out above. Many of the difficulties of the Mahabharata textual criticism of which he speaks in his paper are idiosyncrasies. RUBEN's paper is, in general, quite intelligent, but not at all important for the Mahabharata textual criticism. 

[^280_1]: Even with his reading, R.'s translation is inaccurate. The translation should be: "Aber kaum hatte der übermächtige Garuda (den Baum) mit seinen Füssen berührt, als der Ast des Baumes abbrach", etc. and not "Nachdem (der Baum) von Garuda berührt war, brach von ihm ein Ast," etc. R.'s translation omits *tu, padbhyām* and *balīyasā* and ignores the force of *-mātra-* (ifc.) \!\-With R.'s reading *mātre*, the word *sā* in line 1 (for which there is no variant even in T G M1) remains unclaimed and has to be forcibly connected with *śākhā* in the middle of the following line. Altogether the reading adopted by R. is unsatisfactory.
[^281_1]: $G_{1.2.4.5}$ have used their *adhomukhān* in 340\*. They therefore substitute *tapodhanān* in its place in the original line. M has worked out another combination (*tapodhanān-avānmukhān*).
[^282_1]: R. seems to have somehow a lurking partiality for the consensus of B and S (or even B and G). If he only knew, the agreements between K and S are likely to prove much sounder than those between B and S; for, while there are indications that there may be sporadic contamination between B and G (and perhaps even between B and S), the (genuine) Kaśmiri version ($S$) and S as a whole have certainly the appearance of being almost wholly independent of each other throughout the Adiparvan.


