+++
title = "6 Bhrgus and the Bharata"
+++
[[P278]]
VI. The Bhrgus and the Bharata: A Text-Historical Study[^278_*][^278_1]

The Bhṛgus are unquestionably an interesting old clan. Tempted by the tantalizing affinity between the Sanskrit name Bhṛgu and the Greek φλέγυ in the name of Φλεγύας and of the Φλεγύαι, A. WEBER[^278_2] postulated a genetic connection between the Indian and the Greek names, and even ascribed Indo-germanic antiquity to a certain legend about Bhṛgu Vāruṇi preserved in the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa (11. 6. 1), a legend of which he thought he had discovered a parallel in Greek mythology. The facile phonetic equation put up by WEBER has not, however, commended itself to other scholars, and we are not specially concerned with it either. But it cannot be gainsaid that the clan is very ancient and that some of their legends are of hoary antiquity. There are scattered notices about the Bhṛgus to be found from the Vedic Saṃhitās onwards through the Brāhmaṇa, Āraṇyaka and Upaniṣad literature up to the Epics and the Purāṇas, steadily growing in volume and importance.

[2] Not only is the clan ancient, its legends also are highly interesting. So suggestive in fact are the early myths of this clan that they had in former years engrossed the attention of many a student of Indian mythology, and called forth a variety of interpretations. Thus, A. BERGAIGNE[^278_3] looked upon the Bhṛgu myth of the Ṛgveda as merely a more developed form of the early tradition about the descent of fire and identified Bhṛgu with Agni. A. KUHN[^278_4] and A. BARTH[^278_5] agreed in regarding the Bhṛgus as personifications of the lightning flash, and KUHN[^278_6] tried to harmonize the Greek myth regarding the descent of fire with the Vedic. A. WEBER, as already remarked, saw in a legend preserved in the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa a relic of primitive Indo-germanic mythology. But even the later legends of these people are not without a [[P279]] certain amount of grandiosity and ostentation. Just consider the figure of Paraśurāma: a matricide, annihilator of the Kṣatriyas and finally an *avatāra* of Viṣṇu (the "Preserver") all in one.

[^278_*]: [*ABORI* 18. 1-76.]
[^278_1]: The best general account of the Bhṛgus has been given by SIEG in the *Encyclopaedia* of *Religion and Ethics* (edited by HASTINGS), s. v. "Bhṛgu," from which the following details regarding previous work on this subject have been mainly extracted. For Vedic references see also MACDONELL and KEITH, *Vedic Index of Names and Subjects*, s. v. "Cyavana", "Bhṛgu", etc.
[^278_2]: *ZDMG* 9 (1855), 237-243; "Eine Legende des Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa über die strafende Vergeltung nach dem Tode."
[^278_3]: *Religion Védique* (1878-83) I, 52-56.
[^278_4]: *Herabkunft des Feuers und des Göttertranks* (1859) 8ff; \[2] Mythologische Studien, Vol. I. (1886), 10 ff.
[^278_5]: *Les Religions de l'Inde* (Paris 1885), 8.
[^278_6]: Op. cit. 13 ff. [214 ff.].
[^278_7]: *ZDMG* 9 (1855), 242.

The popularity of the Paraśurāma legend in India is attested by the number of places, scattered all over India, which are associated with his name and his exploits and held sacred to his memory.[^279_1] Near the Kangra District[^279_2] of the Punjab there is a very ancient temple dedicated to Paraśurāma, (a name not yet applied to him in our epic), in which is deposited a copper-plate grant recording the gift of a village to a Brahmin studying the *A.* V. In the State of Udaipur there is a sacred pool called Markuṇḍīya[^279_3] where Rāma is said to have bathed and atoned for his sins; likewise in Cape Comorin.[^279_4] In the Bijapur District[^279_5] of the Bombay Presidency, an axe-shaped rock situated on a riverbank marks the spot where Rāma is represented as having washed his famous axe (*paraśu*), which has given him his nick-name Paraśurāma, Rāma-with-the-Axe; a stone boulder situated in the river bed has preserved Paraśurāma's footprints. Even this irresistible axe of his has been deified, and there is in Mysore State a temple dedicated to it.[^279_6] Gokarn[^279_7] shows a sacred pool dedicated to Mahādeva, which is said to have been built by the son of Jamadagni. Even the Lakhimpur District of distant Assam has a pool to show to which, according to popular belief, Paraśurāma had surrendered his dreaded axe, and which attracts pilgrims from every part of India.

Notwithstanding the absorbing interest of the Bhārgava myths, it is primarily not their interpretation that is attempted here. [3] That is a task fraught with difficulties and uncertainties, as also one which would call for a range of knowledge and a composure of mind to which the present writer can lay no claim. The modest aim of this paper is to collect and collate the Bhārgava references in the Mahābhārata, in other words, to give a succinct account of all that the Great Epic of India has to say about the Bhṛgus. The choice of the source-book is, I think, abundantly justified, because the Mahābhārata, as I believe, is the richest mine for the exploration of the Bhārgava material, a veritable thesaurus of Bhārgava legends, containing as it does the largest number and the greatest variety of such legends. Even this material is naturally not entirely new, having already attracted the attention of scholars, but it seemed to me that it has not been studied with that degree of attention to details which it deserves. It is a trite observation but never-[[P280]]theless true that even what appears on the face of it to be a most insignificant detail might yield a valuable clue if looked at from the correct angle, which is often difficult to get.

[^279_1]: Cf. ANUJAN ACHAN. *Parasurama Legend and its Significance*, p. 8 f. citing the *Imperial Gazetteer of India*. The paper was read at the Eighth Session of the All-India Oriental Conference (Mysore 1935) and has since been published separately with the special sanction of the Government of Cochin.
[^279_2]: *Imp. Gaz.* 19. 124.
[^279_3]: *ibid.* 16. 26.
[^279_4]: *ibid.* 5. 129.
[^279_5]: *ibid.* 13. 148.
[^279_6]: No reference given by ACHAN.
[^279_7]: *Imp. Gaz.* 9. 8.

My intention is to pass under review here all the important myths and legends relating to the different Bhṛgus, which occur in the Mahābhārata, subjecting them to a critical analysis: to study the manner in which they are presented, to investigate their repetitions and even to examine their discrepancies. We shall find that there are many more Bhārgavas mentioned in our epic than commonly known and many more references to Bhārgavas than commonly suspected.

In essence, it must be admitted, this is merely a text-critical study, a subject which, having engaged my attention for a number of years, has acquired considerable fascination for me. But at the end of the paper it is shown that the investigation might at the same time yield results which are not without general value for a partial elucidation of the obscure history of this venerable old text.

The Bhārgava references could have been presented here in many different ways, but it appeared best to take them up for study in the sequence in which they appear in our epic, to examine the material book by book and chapter by chapter. The total number of passages of the Mahābhārata in which the Bhārgavas are mentioned is astonishingly large. Exigencies of space, [4] however, compelled the writer to restrict himself to the discussion of only the more important of the references.

I add here a genealogical table which will enable the reader to follow the legends of the Bhṛgus and the discussions about them with greater ease. The table is made up from the data of the Mahābhārata itself, but it is undoubtedly incomplete; it appears to be very much abridged, lacking many details and intermediate links.

### GENEALOGICAL TREE OF THE BHRGUS (ABRIDGED)

- Bhrgu (m. Pulomā)
- Kavi
    - Śukra
        - Devayānī (m. Yayāti)
            - Yadu
            - Turvasu (m. Satyavatī)
                - Jamadagni (m. Reṇukā)
                    - Kṛṣṇa
                    - Rāma Jāmadagnya
- Cyavana (m. Sukanyā & Āruṣī)
    - (by Āruṣī)
        - Aurva
            - Ṛcīka
    - (by Sukanyā)
        - Pramati (m. Ghṛtācī)
            - Ruru (m. Pramadvarā)
                - Śunaka

[[P281]]
## ĀDIPARVAN[^281_1]

Strangely enough, already in the *second* chapter of the Adiparvan, the Parvasaṃgraha, which is in fact, for the greater part of it, something like a Table of Contents, we make our acquaintance with one of the Bhārgavas, the most famous of them, Rāma Jāmadagnya,[^281_2] not yet a full-fledged *avatāra*,[^281_3] a character which in *reality* has no connection whatsoever with the action of the sublime tragedy which is going to be unfolded in the epic. That comes about in this way. The place where the Mahābhārata war was fought, as everybody knows who knows anything at all about the war, was called Kurukṣetra (Gītā 1. 1):

> [5] *dharmakṣetre Kurukṣetre samavetā yuyutsavaḥ* |  
> *māmakāḥ Pāṇḍavāś caiva*.....

But the Sūta Ugraśravas, son of Lomaharṣaṇa, who recites the epic at the twelve-year sacrificial session held in the Naimiṣa Forest under the auspices of Śaunaka, gives the name of the place as Samantapañcaka[^281_4] and is careful enough to add that he had visited that sacred spot (*puṇyaṃ deśam*) and was as a matter of fact just returning from it (1. 1. 11 f.):

> *Samantapañcakaṃ* nāma puṇyaṃ dvijaniṣevitam |  
> *gatavān* asmi *taṃ deśaṃ yuddhaṃ yatrabhavat* purā ||  
> *Pāṇḍavānāṃ Kurūṇāṃ ca sarveṣāṃ ca mahīkṣitām* |  
> *didṛkṣur* āgatas *tasmāt samīpaṃ bhavatām iha* ||

That obviously needed a little explication. Accordingly we find in the beginning of the second chapter a query about this Samantapañcaka from the sages who formed the audience. They want to know all about this new place of pilgrimage (1. 2. 1):

> *Samantapañcakam* iti *yad uktaṃ sūtanandana* |  
> *etat sarvaṃ yathānyāyaṃ śrotum icchāmahe vayam* ||

And from the story narrated by the Sūta it proves to be a Bhārgava place of pilgrimage, situated probably somewhere in the neighbourhood of or within the limits of Kurukṣetra. It was in fact, as the Sūta proceeds to explain, [[P282]] the sacred spot where the Bhārgava Rāma, the foremost of weapon-bearers (*śastrabhṛtāṃ varaḥ* 1. 2. 3), after extirpating the warrior race during the interval between the Tretā and the Dvāpara Ages, had made five pools of blood, probably forming a circle (hence obviously Samantapañcaka), and standing in the middle of the pools the terrible man offered the uncanny oblation of congealed blood to his forefathers, until the shades of the departed ancestors appeared before him and pacified him, giving him the boon that those sanguinary pools of his would become holy places of pilgrimage (1. 2. 3 ff.):

> *Tretādvāparayoḥ saṃdhau Rāmaḥ śastrabhṛtāṃ varaḥ* |  
> *asakṛt pārthivaṃ kṣatraṃ jaghānāmarṣacoditaḥ* ||  
> *sa sarvaṃ kṣatraṃ utsadya svavīryeṇānaladyutiḥ* |  
> *Samantapañcake pañca cakāra rudhirahradān* ||  
> *sa teṣu rudhirāmbhasu hradeṣu krodhamūrcchitaḥ* |  
> *pitṝn saṃtarpayāmāsa rudhireneti naḥ śrutam* || (3) (4) (5)

[6] A few stanzas later we read that the Kuru-Pāṇḍava war was also fought at this Samantapañcaka (1. 2. 9):

> *antare caiva saṃprāpte Kali*-*Dvāparayor* *abhūt* |  
> *Samantapañcake yuddhaṃ Kuru-Pāṇḍavasenayor* ||

Samantapañcaka is thus made out to be only another name of Kurukṣetra: evidently a Bhārgava name.[^282_1] The people of India have forgotten this Bhārgava synonym: they remember only Kurukṣetra, a name which has struck deep root in the memory of the people. Even now at every solar eclipse there is held at Kurukṣetra, a mammoth fair,[^282_2] which attracts hundreds of thousands of devout pilgrims, hailing from the different corners of India, who reverently visit the spot hallowed by the blood of their beloved kings of yore, those shining examples of knighthood and chivalry, who counting their lives as straw fell fighting, waging a holy war (*dharmayuddha*), which has made the Kurukṣetra a *dharmakṣetra*.


[^281_1]: In the Adiparvan, the references are to the Critical *Edition* of that book published by this Institute (Poona 1933); elsewhere to the *Vulgate*, the edition used being the Chitrashala edition (Poona 1929-1933). References to the Vulgate are distinguished by prefixing "B." to them.
[^281_2]: Special studies on Paraśurāma: Irawati KARVE, "The Parasurama Myth" in the *Journal* of *the* University of *Bombay*, vol. 1 (1932), pp. 115-139; and the paper by ANUJAN ACHAN cited above, *Parasurama Legend* and its *Significance* (1935), and Jarl CHARPENTIER, Paraśu-Rāma, *Kuppuswami Sastri Comm*. *Vol.* (1937) pp. 9-16.
[^281_3]: Cf. HOPKINS, *Epic Mythology* (Grundriss d. indo-arischen Phil und Altertumskunde III. Bd., 1. Heft B), p. 211.
[^281_4]: In the Śalyaparvan it is said that it is a holy place of pilgrimage situated on the Sarasvatī C. 9. 2136.
[^282_1]: Samantapañcaka mentioned in Parvans 1, 3, 6, 7 and 9 only. That the war took place at Samantapañcaka is also mentioned in:  
    B. 6. 1. 6:  
    *SAMANTAPAÑCAKĀD bāhyaṃ śibirāṇi sahasraśaḥ* |  
    *kārayāmāsa vidhivat Kuntīputro Yudhiṣṭhiraḥ* ||  
    C. 7. 2725:  
    *śvaḥ śroṣyate śiras tasya Saindhavasya raṇe hataṃ* |  
    *SAMANTAPAÑCAKĀD bāhyaṃ viśokā bhava mā rudaḥ* ||  
    C. 9. 3032:  
    *etat Kurukṣetra-Samantapañcakam* |  
    *Prajāpater uttaravedir ucyate* ||  
    C. 9. 3620-21:  
    *Samantapañcake puṇye triṣu lokeṣu viśrute* |  
    *ahaṃ nidhanam āsādya lokān prāpsyāmi śāśvatān* ||
[^282_2]: *Imperial Gazetteer of India*, (1886) vol. 8, p. 374 f.

In passing, it may be mentioned that this short account of the annihilation of the Kṣatriyas by the Brahmin Rāma Jāmadagnya—a very popular theme, as will be seen later on, with the redactors of our Mahābhārata—has been even amplified in later times by the interpolation of a short dialogue (of eight lines) between Rāma Jāmadagnya and his Bhārgava ancestors (Adi 71\*; cf. B. 3. 83. 29 ff.) :

> *Rāma Rāma mahābhāga prītaḥ sma tava Bhārgava* |  
> *anayā pitṛbhaktyā ca vikrameṇa ca te vibho* |  
> *varaṃ vṛṇīṣva bhadraṃ te kim icchasi mahādyute* |  
> *Rāma uvāca*  
> *yadi me pitaraḥ prītā yady anugrahyatā mayi* |  
> *yac ca roṣābhibhūtena kṣatraṃ utsaditaṃ mayā* | etc.

This passage, which is an abridged version of a dialogue occurring in the Tīrthayātrāparvan, a sub-section of the Āraṇyakaparvan, is found at this point only in certain Devanagari MSS. (including those of the "K" Version), and is missing in the Bengali MSS. as well as in the entire Southern recension, and therefore certainly suspect. We shall have occasion to mention other similar enlargements of Bhārgava anecdotes.

[[P283]]
[7] The next reference to the Bhārgava Rāma occurs in adhy. 58 of the Adi. and the theme is the same. The chapter, as a matter of fact, describes the circumstances which led to the incarnation of the gods and goddesses of the Puranic pantheon on this earth of ours. But the account begins with an allusion to the great exploit of the Bhārgava Rāma, his total extirpation of the bad old kings of yore (1. 58. 4):

> *triḥsaptakṛtvaḥ pṛthivīṃ kṛtvā niḥkṣatriyāṃ purā* |  
> *Jāmadagnyas tapas tepe Mahendre parvatottame* || (I)

The first line of this stanza is worthy of special note. It occurs, with slight variations, over and over again in our Mahābhārata, its exultant note ringing like a distant echo in the remotest corners and crevices of this huge epos, which was composed by Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana to spread in this world the fame of the high-souled Pāṇḍavas and of other puissant Kṣatriyas (1. 56. 25 f.):

> *Kṛṣṇa-Dvaipāyanenedaṃ kṛtaṃ puṇyacikīrṣuṇā* ||  
> *kīrtiṃ prathayatā loke Pāṇḍavānāṃ mahātmanām* |  
> *anyeṣāṃ kṣatriyāṇāṃ ca bhūridraviṇatejasām* ||

When the Bhārgava Rāma, after making a clean sweep of the Kṣatriyas, retired to Mount Mahendra, on the eastern coast of India, to practise auster-[[P284]]ities, there remained of the warrior caste only the females, and the Kṣatriya race was in imminent danger of becoming totally extinct (Adi. 58). When the earth was thus bereft of Kṣatriya manhood, the Kṣatriya women, casting aside their pride, approached the Brahmins for offspring. With these Kṣatriya women cohabited the Brahmins of rigid vows of those times, in pity for their sad plight. They cohabited with the Kṣatriya women, not from passion, only in season, never out of season. Thus thousands of Kṣatriya women conceived from their intercourse with pious Brahmins. Their children were the virtuous Kṣatriyas, who ushered in again the Golden Age. Thus sprang up a second Kṣatriya race from the surviving Kṣatriya women, owing to their intercourse with ascetic Brahmins. The new generation, blessed with long life, throve in virtue. And there were again established the four castes, having Brahmins at their head (1. 58. 8. 10):

> *evaṃ tad brāhmaṇaiḥ kṣatraṃ kṣatriyāsu tapasvibhiḥ* |  
> *jātaṃ ṛdhyata dharmeṇa sudīrgheṇāyuṣānvitam* |  
> *catvāro 'pi tadā varṇā babhūvur brāhmaṇottarāḥ* ||  
> *tāḥ prajāḥ pṛthivīpāla dharmavrataparāyaṇāḥ* |  
> *ādhibhir vyādhibhiś caiva vimuktāḥ sarvaśo narāḥ* ||

Later the Asuras, defeated by the gods and expelled from heaven, in order to continue their fight for supremacy, took birth in royal families, among animals and elsewhere on this earth, and so again godless kings were born here on the earth. The goddess Earth, oppressed by this vicious and godless creation, lodged a complaint with Brahmā, who, with a view to freeing her from the tyranny of her oppressors, ordains that the various gods and goddesses, *gandharvas* and *apsarases* incarnate themselves, in different forms and shapes, to wage war with the Asuras, and annihilate them.

In this legend, which is here skilfully interwoven with the much lauded exploit of the Bhārgava Rāma, the Brahmin appears in the rôle of the *de facto* Creator of the Later Kṣatriyas. But in a variant version of the same incident, which occurs in the Śānti (adhy. 48-49 of the Vulgate) and which will be discussed in due course, the narrator, Śrī-Kṛṣṇa himself, while admitting that there was a general slaughter of the Kṣatriyas, allows that some Kṣatriyas had escaped death at the hands of the Bhārgava Rāma and, after his retirement to the forest, emerged from their places of concealment and resumed sovereignty. But in this prologue to the Ādiparvan, however, Vaiśampāyana, as we have seen is quite certain that the Kṣatriyas were *totally* annihilated by Rāma and the race was *entirely* regenerated by Brahmins.

Another little digression, adhy. 60, which explains the origin and genealogy of the different orders of beings, from the gods downwards, contains *also* a genealogy of the Bhārgavas, the only Brahmanic genealogy, besides that of the Āṅgirasas[^284_1] (a clan closely connected with the Bhṛgus) considered by the epic bards worthy of inclusion in this chapter.

This confused cosmogonic account (1. 60. 1 ff.) begins with the enumeration of the six mind-born (*mānasa*) sons of Brahmā and the eleven sons of Sthāṇu, namely, the eleven Rudras. The six mind-born sons of Brahmā are Marīci, Aṅgiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha and Kratu, which list does not include Bhṛgu.[^284_2] Dakṣa [[P285]] [9] was born from the right thumb (*aṅguṣṭha*) of Brahmā, and Dakṣa's wife from his left thumb. Dakṣa begat fifty daughters on his wife, of whom he gave away thirteen, in a lot, to Kaśyapa, son of Marīci. Kaśyapa's offspring were the gods and the titans.[^285_1] The list of gods and demi-gods closes with the progeny of Kaśyapa (1. 60. 39):

> *eṣa devagaṇo rājan kīrtitas te 'nupūrvaśaḥ* |  
> *yaṃ kīrtayitvā manujaḥ sarvapāpaiḥ pramucyate* ||

Immediately, after this list of celestials, come Bhṛgu and his descendants (1. 60. 40):

> *Brahmaṇo hṛdayaṃ bhittvā niḥsṛto bhagavān Bhṛguḥ* |

The close proximity to the gods is perhaps intended to be an indication of the high position of the Bhṛgus in the Precedence List. The genealogy given here is short and mentions only the well-known descendants of one branch of the Bhārgava clan, the branch made famous by Rāma Jāmadagnya. The pedigree begins with Bhṛgu, who also was a son of Brahmā, being born by piercing his heart (*hṛdaya*).

But this ancestry of Bhṛgu is in conflict with another account found in the epic (Anuśāsana 85 of the Vulgate), according to which Bhṛgu was born from the *seed* of Prajāpati which had fallen in the fire.

The latter account has partial Vedic support, for we read in the Aitareya Brāhmaṇa (3. 34) that the *seed* of Prajāpati became divided into three parts, from which were born Āditya, Bhṛgu and Aṅgiras. On the other hand, in the Pañcaviṃśa Brāhmaṇa (18. 9. 1),[^285_2] the paternity of Bhṛgu with two others is attributed to Varuṇa. Further in the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa (11. 6. 1. 1), Jaiminīya Brāhmaṇa (1. 42) Taittirīya Upaniṣad (1. 3. 1. 1), Taittirīya Āraṇyaka (9. 1) also, Bhṛgu is said to be the son of Varuṇa; from Varuṇa, it is said, he obtained the knowledge of Brahma.

There seems to be partial synthesis of some of these divergent versions in the confused Anuśāsana account cited above, according to which, while Mahādeva, in the form of *Varuṇa*, was performing a sacrifice, *Brahmā* was presiding and all the gods and the goddesses were present. Seeing that assemblage of celestial damsels of exceeding beauty, desire sprang up in the mind of Brahmā, and he had an emission. As soon as the seed came out, Brahmā took it up with the sacrificial ladle and poured it, like a libation of clarified butter, with the necessary *mantras*, on the burning fire. Thereupon [[P286]] three beings emerged from the sacrificial fire. One arose from the flames (*bhṛk*) and *hence* he was called Bhṛgu; another came out of the burning charcoals (*aṅgāra*) and hence he passed by the name of Aṅgiras; the third originated from a heap of extinguished coals and was called Kavi. This tradition we find faintly reflected in a stanza (Adi. 216\*), interpolated in most MSS. of the Northern recension after 1. 5. 6:

> *Bhṛgur maharṣir bhagavān Brahmaṇā vai svayambhuvā* |  
> *Varuṇasya kratau jātaḥ pāvakād iti naḥ śrutam* ||

Here we see that the great seer, "Bhagavān" Bhṛgu is said to have been produced by the self-create Lord Brahmā during Varuṇa's sacrifice from Fire.

However, to return to the pedigree of the Bhṛgus given in Adi 60, we find the statement that Bhṛgu had two sons, Kavi (whose son was Śukra) and Cyavana. About both Śukra and Cyavana, we hear a great deal in our Mahābhārata. From Cyavana the short pedigree runs as follows: Cyavana-Aurva-Ṛcīka-Jamadagni-Rāma. About Kavi and Ṛcīka alone the epic has not very much to narrate, but it is full of the amazing powers and the wonderful exploits of the remaining Bhārgavas mentioned here, for whom our epic shows great predilection.

Thus we find, only a few chapters later, the epic relating at great length the well-known story of Yayāti (Yayātyupākhyāna, Adi. 71-80), in which Śukra, the Asura priest, and his haughty and ambitious daughter Devayānī play a prominent rôle, and which probably contains a solid substratum of historic truth. Between Yayāti and the Pāṇḍavas there intervene, according to the computation of PARGITER, nearly ninety generations. And thus although the connection of this episode with the main epic story is of most slender character, it possesses considerable Bhārgava interest, which is probably the main reason why it has been excerpted here from some Puranic source.[^286_1] The story of Yayāti is introduced in the epic in the following manner.

In adhy. 70, Vaiśampāyana briefly sketches the early history of the Lunar Dynasty, incidentally mentioning Yayāti and his five sons. Janamejaya is not satisfied with this sketchy account and requests Vaiśampāyana to relate in detail the story of Yayāti, a remote ancestor of the Pāṇḍavas, "tenth in descent from Prajāpati" (*daśamo yaḥ Prajāpateḥ* 1. 71. 1). The story of Yayāti is as follows.

[11] Bṛhaspati, son of Aṅgiras, was the preceptor of the Devas, the Bhārgava Śukra (Kāvya Uśanas) that of the Asuras. Śukra, a powerful sorcerer, like all the other Bhārgavas, had the knowledge of the secret of reviving the dead (*saṃjīvanī vidyā*); not so Bṛhaspati. The Devas were therefore handicapped in their wars with the Asuras. So at the instance of the Devas Bṛhaspati's son Kaca goes to Śukra, who was then the priest sorcerer of the Asura king Vṛṣaparvan and lives with him as his disciple in order to obtain from him a knowledge of the art of reviving the dead. Śukra's beautiful daughter Devayānī falls headlong in love with Kaca, son of Bṛhaspati, and boldly proposes marriage, an honour which Kaca politely but firmly declines. Subsequently one day when Devayānī and Śarmiṣṭhā, [[P287]] the daughter of the Asura Vṛṣaparvan, are having a bath in a neighbouring river, Indra tossed their clothes about, which had been left by the girls on the river bank, so that Śarmiṣṭhā by mistake took up the dress of Devayānī. There ensues a hefty quarrel between the girls, and Śarmiṣṭhā throws her rival into a dry well overgrown with grass. And there she remains until she is seen and pulled out of the well by the gallant king Yayāti, whom she promptly woos and who with the approval of her father, Śukra, marries her. Previously, as a recompense for her overbearing conduct towards Devayānī, Śarmiṣṭhā, the Asura princess, had become Devayānī's slave. She now accompanies Devayānī to the capital of Yayāti and the three people live in happiness together for some time. Yayāti has been warned beforehand by the Asura priest Śukra that he must on no account call Śarmiṣṭhā on to his bed: she was only a slave-girl belonging to Devayānī's entourage. But Śarmiṣṭhā prevails upon the soft-hearted and indulgent Yayāti, by dint of importunity and feminine logic to act so that her menstrual period will not be wasted, "for the husband of one's friend is as good as one's own husband". Yayāti moved by her importunities admits the logic of Śarmiṣṭhā's requisition and begets on her secretly three sons, while Devayānī has only two. Devayānī learns the truth of the whole affair one day by accident, and goes in a huff to her father, complaining bitterly of the perfidy of her husband. The enraged Asura priest Śukra curses Yayāti that he would instantly suffer the effects of premature decrepitude, and so it happens. Śukra relents, however, and adds that, as Yayāti had acted from pure motives he might transfer his premature old age at will to any one who is willing to take it on in his stead. Accordingly Yayāti exchanged his decrepitude for the youth of his youngest son, [[P288]] Pūru, son of the Asura princess Śarmiṣṭhā, who was the only one of his five sons willing to take on his old age and to whom he subsequently handed over his vast kingdom as a reward for his filial affection.

In this version of the Yayāti legend, the Bhārgavī Devayānī has it all her own way and poor Śarmiṣṭhā, the Asura princess has been thrust in the background except in the finale, which raises Śarmiṣṭhā's youngest son to the throne and the tables are turned on Devayānī, the daughter of the Asura priest, Śukra. In spite of the Yayātyupākhyāna, Indian tradition honours Śarmiṣṭhā as the pattern of a wife most honoured by her husband; for in Kālidāsa's famous drama, when Kāśyapa gives his parting blessing to his beloved daughter, Śakuntalā, he could think of no better boon than to wish that she might be like Śarmiṣṭhā:

> *Yayāter iva Śarmiṣṭhā bhartur bahumatā bhava*

"Be thou highly honoured of thy husband, as was Śarmiṣṭhā of Yayāti!"

The extermination of the Kṣatriyas by the Bhārgava Rāma and the subsequent regeneration of the Kṣatriya race by pious Brahmins find a [[P288]] mention already for the third time in adhy. 98 of the Adi: this time in the course of a conversation between Bhīṣma and Satyavatī. The continuance of the royal family of Kurus was sorely jeopardized by the untimely death of both the sons of Śaṃtanu, Citrāṅgada and Vicitravīrya. Satyavatī asks Bhīṣma to marry the young and beautiful widows of his half-brother Vicitravīrya and beget children on them for the continuation of the race of the Kurus, a proposal which Bhīṣma firmly rejects as that would mean a deliberate breaking of his vow of celibacy. He proposes instead that a Brahmin be called to officiate (*niyoga*) and do the job. He cites a precedent for this *āpaddharma*. It is no other than the story of the Bhārgava Rāma and its sequel. To avenge the death of his father, Bhīṣma relates, the Bhārgava Rāma slew Arjuna, the son of Kṛtavīrya, king of the Haihayas. Then he set out on his war chariot to conquer the world. And taking up his *bow*, he hurled his mighty magical missiles (*astras*) and exterminated the Kṣatriyas more than once. In days of yore this illustrious descendant of Bhṛgu annihilated the Kṣatriyas thrice seven times (1. 98. 3):

> *triḥsaptakṛtvaḥ pṛthivī kṛtā niḥkṣatriyā purā* | (II)

Then from a high sense of duty, the virtuous Brahmins of the [[P289]] day, skilled in the Vedas, co-habited with the widows of the Kṣatriyas massacred by the Bhārgava Rāma and begat on them offsprings and thus revived the almost extinct race of the Kṣatriyas. Satyavatī should unhesitatingly follow this excellent precedent and arrange for the revival of the dying race of the Kurus.

So far we have come across only legends of the past achievements of the Bhārgavas. The first reference to a direct contact between a Bhārgava and one of the epic characters occurs in adhy. 121 of the Adi. In this pseudo-historical epic, the myth may not be properly regarded as concerned with events in time. Therefore the Bhārgava Rāma, who only a few chapters previously is said to have lived in the interval between the Tretā and the Dvāpara Ages is here represented as the teacher (*guru*) of Ācārya Droṇa, who lived in the interval between the Dvāpara and the Kali Ages. The pupilship is only symbolical, but the basis of the symbolism is significant. Ācārya Droṇa is the *guru* of the Kauravas and the Pāṇḍavas and of all the other valiant Kṣatriyas of the time, and he was also one of the greatest warriors on the side of the Kauravas in the Bhārata War. But Ācārya Droṇa must also have a *guru*. And who would be more suitable as *guru* than the Bhārgava Rāma, who is the foremost of all weapon-bearers (*sarvaśastrabhṛtāṃ varaḥ*)?

Once the symbol has been accepted, it is treated as real, and the myth is worked out in great detail. Thus we are told that when Droṇa had finished his studies and taken up the duties of a house-holder, he began to feel the pinch of poverty. He then happened to hear that the Bhārgava Rāma was bestowing wealth on Brahmins. No inconsistency or anachronism is felt, because Rāma is assumed to be "ever-living" (*cīrañjīvin*). So Droṇa presented himself before the great Bhārgava, who was about to start for the forest, and asked for some wealth for himself. Rāma ruefully confessed to him that whatever wealth he at one time possessed he had freely presented to the Brahmins; he had even presented the earth to Kaśyapa, his sacrificing priest. And now he had nothing left except his mortal body and his weapons and magical missiles (*astras*). He asked Droṇa to choose what he wanted. Droṇa of course chose the famous missiles with which Rāma had conquered the whole earth. Rāma accordingly gave all his [[P289]] weapons to Droṇa, instructing him at the same time fully in the science of arms.

This story of Droṇa and Rāma was apparently popular, for we find it repeated in an abridged form in adhy. 154, it being related there to the Pāṇḍavas by a Brahmin, who was urging them to proceed to the capital of Drupada to attend the *svayaṃvara* of Draupadī.

We learn another fragment of Bhārgava history from adhy. 169 to 172 of the Adi, the Aurvopākhyāna, which is, as a matter of fact, a digression within a digression.

While the Pāṇḍava brothers were proceeding by slow stages to the capital of king Drupada to attend Draupadī's *svayaṃvara,* they are opposed on the way by Citraratha Aṅgāraparṇa, king of the Gandharvas, whom Arjuna after a brief fight overcomes. Citraratha and Arjuna soon become close friends. This sudden friendship gives the necessary opportunity to the skilful *raconteur* to smuggle in some stories. Citraratha, as a matter of fact, relates to Arjuna a number of interesting but flimsily motivated anecdotes, which are a pure and unadulterated digression, among them the well-known story of Vasiṣṭha. It is related how Viśvāmitra, king of Kānyakubja, tried to seize Vasiṣṭha's sacred cow (*kāmadhenu*) and, failing, turned ascetic and in the end became a Brahmin; how king Kalmāṣapāda Saudāsa was cursed by Vasiṣṭha's son Śakti (or Śaktri) to become a cannibal and how he began his career as a cannibal by devouring Vasiṣṭha's own sons including Śakti; how Vasiṣṭha subsequently freed the king from the effects of the curse. Then finally to dissuade his enraged grandson Parāśara, son of Śakti, from destroying the whole creation in his frenzy, Vasiṣṭha relates to him the story of the Bhārgava Aurva. It will thus be seen that the Bhārgava legend is emboxed within the Vasiṣṭha legend, which is itself an episode of the Caitraratha section. This story of Aurva is as follows.

Once upon a time there was a king by name Kṛtavīrya of the Haihayas, whose family priests were the Bhṛgus. On them he bestowed great wealth. After his death the princes of his family, for some reason or other, demanded it back. The Bhṛgus came out with some of it, but not all. It then happened that one of the Kṣatriyas, accidentally digging the ground in the settlement of the Bhṛgus, came upon a large store of wealth buried under [[P290]] ground. Enraged at what they naturally considered deceitful conduct on the part of the Bhṛgus, the Kṣatriyas used violence to the Bhṛgus, and slew them all indiscriminately. The Kṣatriyas even hunted down the women of the Bhṛgus, and with a view to exterminating the race killed all those that were pregnant. Pursued by the Kṣatriyas, some of the Bhṛgu women took shelter in the inaccessible fastnesses of the Himalayas. One of these women,[^290_1] in order to perpetuate the race of the Bhārgavas, had concealed her embryo in her thigh. The Kṣatriyas, when they came to know of it, pursued her with the intention of decimating her embryo; when, lo and behold, the child was born from his mother's thigh, blinding the Haihayas with his lustre. Bereft of sight, they roamed about in the forest, and, meekly approaching the faultless Brahmin lady, prostrated themselves before her, begging that their eyesight might be restored. "My good sirs", said the Brahmin lady, "I have not robbed you of your eyesight, nor am I angry with you. But this scion of the Bhṛgus seems certainly to be angry with you. Your eyesight has no doubt been destroyed by this high-souled Bhārgava, whose wrath has been kindled by the massacre of his kinsmen. When you took to destroying even the embryos of the Bhṛgu race, the child was held by me concealed in my thigh for one hundred years. That he may do good to the Bhṛgu race, the entire Veda with its six aṅgas revealed itself to him when he was still in the womb. Being enraged at the slaughter of his kinsmen, he desires to kill you. It is by his divine effulgence that your eyesight has been destroyed. Pray therefore, my good sirs, to this excellent son of mine, born of my thigh (*ūru*); and pacified by your humbly prostrating yourself before him, he may restore your eyesight". Thereupon all those Kṣatriyas on their bended knees said to that high-born child, "Forgive us", and the high-born child forgave them. But that descendant of the Bhārgava race did not forget that outrage and resolved in his mind upon destroying this wicked world. With that object in view he started performing the most severe austerities. By the intensity of his austerities he afflicted all the worlds. On learning what Aurva was doing to avenge the wrong done to them by the Kṣatriyas, the shades of his ancestors came to him and addressed him as follows: "O Aurva, O child, the prowess of thy fierce austerities has been seen by us. Control thy anger and forgive the people." They explain to him that the Kṣatriyas were really *not* to blame for the slaughter of the Bhṛgus! How could those puny Kṣatriyas ever hope to kill the Bhārgavas? That *contre-temps* was a little contrivance of the Bhārgavas themselves. The fact was that the Bhārgavas were tired of their lives and longed to die, but death dared not touch them, those sinless effulgent specimens of humanity, and suicide was a cowardly act and a sin. They had therefore staged that little quarrel with those foolish and arrogant Kṣatriyas, so that the Kṣatriyas might get enraged and kill them, as they did. Of what use could wealth be to those emancipated souls, whose sole desire was to obtain heaven? Aurva replies that they may be all true, but he had made a vow to destroy the world in order to calm his own anger and he must destroy it, or else he would be destroyed himself by the fire of his uncontrollable wrath. And so the world was in imminent danger of being totally destroyed! But the ancestors of Aurva show him a way out of the dilemma. They wisely advise him to fling the fire of his wrath in the waters, which are the primeval source and support of the world, and Aurva does so. And now, in the [[P291]] shape of horse's head (*hayaśiras*), his wrath dwells in the ocean, consuming its waters, which are the world (*loka hy apo-mayāḥ smṛtāḥ* 1. 171. 19).

In the above legend we may notice some of the repeated motives of Bhārgava stories. There is first of all the feud with the Kṣatriyas, which finally develops into the creation of the figure of the Bhārgava Rāma, "the foremost of all weapon-bearers," who single-handed, with the aid of his magical weapons, the *astras*, conquers the whole earth, annihilating the Kṣatriyas thrice seven times. Then there is the motif of the opportune birth of a miraculous child, whose effulgent lustre either blinds the oppressor (as here) or consumes him (as in the case of Cyavana). There is, lastly, the appearance of the shades of the ancestors, who step in to stop the carnage either contemplated (as here) or actually perpetrated (as in the case of Rāma), to avenge some private wrong done with reference to the family.

[[P291]]
## SABHĀPARVAN

The short Sabhā, which is a compact little book with 81 chapters and about 2700 stanzas (in the Vulgate), begins with the Erection of the Darbar Hall and ends with the Second Gambling Match. Here the story marches forward by rapid strides, consisting as it *does* mainly of spirited dialogue and dramatic action. The digressions are few and far between, and of *upākhyānas* as such there are none. The real important digressions, which occur early in the beginning, are two: firstly, the somewhat lengthy and imaginative descriptions (*ākhyānas*) by Nārada of the halls of the celestials Indra, Yama, Varuṇa, Kubera, and Brahmā, preceded by a short Nīti tractate (adhy. 5-12); and, secondly, the previous history of Jarāsaṃdha, narrated by Kṛṣṇa (adhy. 17-19). Consequently, in this parvan, the Bhārgava material is extremely [[P292]] scanty.

The Bhārgavas are nevertheless briefly mentioned several times. Thus, naturally, many of the Bhārgavas, to wit, Bhṛgu, Mārkaṇḍeya, Rāma, Jāmadagnya, are several times mentioned as being present, along with other famous sages and seers of the past, in the halls of the celestials mentioned above, as also as a matter of course in the newly erected hall of Yudhiṣṭhira. In adhy. 8, Rāma has been placed by mistake among the royal sages (*rājarṣis*). They are likewise present at the coronation of Yudhiṣṭhira. These static figures are like mural decorations, and of no special interest to us. We shall therefore ignore them.

Rāma's extermination of the Kṣatriyas, which is really never quite forgotten by our bards, is mentioned in adhy. 14. Kṛṣṇa prefaces his long reply to Yudhiṣṭhira regarding the prerequisites of the Rājasūya sacrifice by pointing out, quite irrelevantly, that the contemporary Kṣatriyas were far inferior to that old race of Kṣatriyas that was exterminated by the Bhārgava Rāma (B. 2. 14. 2):

> *Jāmadagnyena Rāmeṇa kṣatraṃ yad avaśeṣitam* |  
> *tasmād avarajaṃ* loke *yad* idaṃ *kṣatrasaṃjñitam* ||

It was mentioned above that the high esteem in which our epic bards held Rāma Jāmadagnya had led to his being represented as the teacher of Ācārya Droṇa in the science of arms. The same ideology is responsible for the sedulously fostered belief that Rāma was the teacher of Bhīṣma also, an idea which is taken hold of and further developed in that late addition to the Udyoga, the Ambā episode (Ambopākhyāna). Rāma is represented as standing in the same relation to Karṇa, the protégé and ally of Duryodhana. So, in his denunciation of Kṛṣṇa, Śiśupāla mentions Karṇa's pupilship under Rāma as one of Karṇa's qualifications entitling him to receive the *arghya* (B. 2. 37. 15 f.):

> *ayaṃ* ca *sarvarājñāṃ* vai *balaślāghī mahābalaḥ* |  
> *Jāmadagnyasya dayitaḥ śiṣyo viprasya Bhārata* ||  
> *Yenātmabalaṃ āśritya rājāno yudhi nirjitāḥ* |  
> *taṃ ca Karṇaṃ atikramya kathaṃ Kṛṣṇas tvayārcitaḥ* ||

[[P292]]
## ĀRAṆYAKAPARVAN

This book is a veritable thesaurus of ancient Brahmanic myths and legends. We accordingly find that a fair amount of Bhārgava material has been incorporated in it. We further find that one Bhārgava takes a considerable share in the story-telling that is done here.

The first important reference to the Bhṛgus is in the Tīrthayātrā section. The list of *tīrthas* given in adhy. 82 ff (of the Vulgate) is said to have been first communicated by the sage Pulastya to Bhīṣma and then repeated by Nārada to Yudhiṣṭhira. It is in reality a material compendium of *tīrthas*, which gives, in the space of a stanza or two, the necessary details about the particular *tīrtha*: the name of the *tīrtha,* the ritual acts to be done there, and finally the merit (*puṇya*) accruing from these acts. Thus, for example, we read (B. 3. 83. 13 ff.):

"O king, going to Śālūkinī and bathing in the Daśāśvamedha, the pilgrim obtains the merit of performing 10 *aśvamedha* sacrifices. Then going to Sarpadevī, that excellent *tīrtha* of the Nāgas, one obtains the merit of performing 1 *agniṣṭoma* sacrifice and goes to the world of the Nāgas. One should then proceed, O virtuous man, to (the shrine of) Tarantuka, the gate-keeper. Staying there only for one night, one obtains the merit of giving [[P293]] away 1000 kine. Then going to the Pañcanada, with regulated diet and subdued soul, and bathing in the Koṭitīrtha, one obtains the merit of performing 1 *aśvamedha* sacrifice. Going to the *tīrtha* of the Aśvins, a man is born handsome (in a future birth, of course). One should then go, O virtuous man, to the excellent *tīrtha* called Vārāha, where Viṣṇu in times of yore appeared in the form of a boar. Bathing there, O foremost of men, one obtains the merit of performing 1 *agniṣṭoma* sacrifice. O king of kings, one should then visit Somatīrtha, situated in Jayantī. Bathing in it, one obtains the merit of performing 1 *rājasūya* sacrifice. Bathing in Ekahaṃsa, one obtains the merit of giving away 1000 kine. O ruler of men, going to the Kṛtaśauca, the pilgrim becomes purified, and obtains the merit of performing 1 *puṇḍarīka* sacrifice. Then going to Muñjavaṭa, the place sacred to Sthāṇu, and fasting for one night, one acquires the position of *gāṇapatya*"— And so on and so forth.

Only very rarely is this dreary enumeration interrupted by a brief account of some myth or legend connected with the place of pilgrimage in question. Now we find embedded in this list the legend connected with the Rāmahradas (B. 3. 83. 26 ff.), which appears to have considerably roused the interest of the compiler and to which he has devoted not less than 32 lines. The story is of course no other than that of the extirpation of the Kṣatriya race by the Bhārgava Rāma, of which this is already the fourth repetition in some form or other. The story is as follows.

The greatly effulgent and heroic Rāma, after exterminating the Kṣatriyas with great valour, formed five lakes filled with the blood of the slaughtered warriors. And he offered that blood as oblation to his forefathers, who were most gratified by this supreme act of filial piety. The shades of these ancestors appeared before him and addressed him as follows: "O Rāma, O Rāma, O fortunate one! We are pleased, O Bhārgava, with thy filial piety and with thy great valour. Ask for a boon, O greatly effulgent one. What dost thou wish to have?" Having been thus addressed by his ancestors, Rāma, that foremost of smiters (*Rāmaḥ praharatāṃ varaḥ* B. 3. 83. 31), thus spoke with joined hands to his ancestors: "If you are pleased with me and if I have deserved your favour then by your grace I desire that I may again derive pleasure in asceticism. By your power, may I be freed from the sin I have incurred by killing these Kṣatriyas in a fit of wrath. Also may these sanguinary lakes become holy places of pilgrimage celebrated throughout the world". Hearing these righteous words of Rāma, his ancestors were highly pleased, [20] and filled with joy they thus replied to Rāma: "Let thy austerities [[P294]] prosper, especially by virtue of thy filial piety. Forsooth thou hast exterminated the Kṣatriyas in a fit of wrath, but thou art already freed from that sin, for they have fallen owing to their own misdeeds. These lakes of thine shall without doubt become places of pilgrimage. He who will bathe in these lakes and offer here oblations to his ancestors will please his manes and they will gratify all his heart's desire, and lead him to the eternal celestial regions". Having granted these boons to Rāma and affectionately taken leave of him, the shades became invisible. It was thus that the bloody lakes of that illustrious descendant of Bhṛgu became sacred places of pilgrimage. Leading the life of a student of the sacred lore and observing sacred vows, if a person bathes in the Lakes of Rāma (Rāmahrada) and worships Rāma, he will obtain much gold.

The reader will easily recognize this as the story which was briefly related already in connection with Samantapañcaka. In fact Rāmahrada appears to be only another name of Samantapañcaka, one of the *tīrthas* explicitly mentioned as having been visited by the Sūta (that is, the putative narrator of the Mahābhārata), before he came to Śaunaka's sacrifice. It will be recalled that some information was asked then about Samantapañcaka in adhy. 2 of the Adi, and in that connection this story was briefly narrated by the Sūta to the sages of the Naimiṣa Forest. There the story was originally summarized in four stanzas, but some subsequent reviser, apparently not satisfied with such a cursory allusion to this epoch-making feat of Rāma, had interpolated at that place the dialogue between Rāma and his ancestors (compressed into eight lines) made up mostly of bits and pieces of verses borrowed from the present context, and like all interpolations proving itself to be somewhat of a bad fit.

A few chapters later, we have a strange story of a conflict between two different *avatāras* of the same god, Viṣṇu, between the Jāmadagnya Rāma and the Dāśarathi Rāma, told in connection with a Bhṛgutīrtha, "celebrated in the three worlds, which Yudhiṣṭhira and his party are said to have visited (B. 3. 99. 34 ff). Once upon a time, the story goes, Rāma Jāmadagnya went to Ayodhyā to meet Rāma Dāśarathi and to test his strength. [21] Rāma D. was sent by his father to the boundary of his kingdom to receive Rāma J. hospitably, but was flagrantly insulted by the latter. Rāma D. nevertheless bends the bow given to him by Rāma J. to test his strength and shoots an arrow which convulses the whole world, astounding Rāma J. Rāma D. further confounds Rāma J. completely by showing him his cosmic form (*viśvarūpa*), made popular by the Gītā (adhy. 11), and rebukes him for his overweening conduct. Abashed, Rāma J. returns to Mount Mahendra, having lost his lustre (*tejas*), which he regains later at some *tīrtha* or other. Yudhiṣṭhira is asked to bathe in the same *tīrtha* that he might regain the lustre he had lost in his conflict with Duryodhana.

This grotesque story, composed probably with the object of glorifying the Kṣatriya Rāma at the cost of the Brahmin Rāma, must be quite a modern interpolation, in the Mahābhārata. Contextually it is an obvious misfit, being incongruously wedged in between two halves of the Agastya legend, with which it has absolutely no connection. Not only is this bizarre story contextually a misfit, it is a very poor piece of composition, and it strikes moreover a discordant note, involving disrespect towards the Bhārgava Rāma, who in our epic is otherwise throughout held up for our admiration as the foremost of weapon-bearers and fighters. Fortunately we are [[P295]] not left to deduce the spuriousness of this passage merely from intrinsic arguments, which are apt to be discredited; for, the passage is missing entirely in the Southern recension, an omission supported by the Kaśmīrī version and even by some ancient Devanagari MSS. The story, which is narrated at some length in the Rāmāyaṇa, is not even alluded to in the Rāmopākhyāna of our epic and belongs evidently to a different complex of legends, quite inharmo-[[P295]]nious with the Mahābhārata context. It appears to have been smuggled into the capacious folds of the Āraṇyakaparvan in quite recent times by some well-meaning but ignorant Northern interpolator anxious to vindicate the claim of the epic to be a complete encyclopaedia of the Hindu legendary lore.[^295_1]

But the next chapter (100) again contains a Bhārgava story, the legend of Dadhīca. Lomaśa relates how the Kālakeyas under the leadership of Vṛtra persecuted the celestials, who betook themselves to Brahmā asking for his protection. The latter advises them to go to the (Bhārgava) Dadhīca and ask for his bones. The sage magnanimously gives up his body for the good of the three worlds. The celestials took the bones of Dadhīca to Viśvakarman, the architect of the gods, who fashioned out of his bones the thunderbolt, with which Indra vanquished the enemies of the gods. The story is repeated in the account of the pilgrimage of Baladeva (Śalya 51 in the Vulgate), where it is said of Dadhīca that he was the strongest of all creatures, tall as the Himalayas and that Indra was always mightily afraid of him on account of his lustre.

Yet again, a few chapters later, the arrival of Yudhiṣṭhira and his party at Mount Mahendra, the headquarters of Rāma, now a *saṃnyāsin*, affords a welcome opportunity to the bard for the presentation of a full-length portrait of the hero of the Bhārgavas, Rāma, son of Jamadagni (Āraṇyaka 115-117 in the Vulgate).

The Pāṇḍavas bathe at the mouth of the Ganges and proceed to the river Vaitaraṇī in Kaliṅga, where the altar of Kaśyapa is. They rest on Mount Mahendra and hear there from Akṛtavraṇa, a disciple of the Bhārgava Rāma, the well-known story of Rāma, which may be summarized as follows.

Gādhi, king of Kānyakubja, had retired to the forest to practise religious austerities. There a most beautiful daughter was born to him, Satyavatī, whom the Bhārgava Ṛcīka wooed. Gādhi perhaps did not relish his suit and tried to evade it by demanding a present of a thousand peculiarly coloured horses, but Ṛcīka supplied them and gained her. Then a Bhṛgu (perhaps, Aurva is meant), who was a great sorcerer, visits the newly married couple and gives his young daughter-in-law the boon that she would give birth to a gifted son, and so would her mother. To fortify the boon, he prescribes that she should embrace an *udumbara* tree, her mother an *aśvattha,* and both should partake of different dishes of some special *caru* prepared by him with powerful incanta-[[P296]]tions and endowed with magical potency. These good ladies go and exchange the trees as well as the dishes of *caru* which were apportioned to them by the great sage, with the result that the daughter was about to give birth to a Brahmin son with Kṣatriyan qualities and the mother a Kṣatriya son with Brahmanic qualities. But the Bhṛgu, who comes to know of this interchange by occult means, comes rushing to the hermitage and tells his daughter-in-law what was going to happen. Moved by her entreaties, he gives a further boon to the young woman who had really been deceived by her mother, postponing the action of the potent charm. Thus her son Jamadagni was saved from the taint of Kṣatriyahood, which ultimately fell upon her grandson Rāma, who turned out to be, as prophesied, a revengeful and blood-thirsty warrior, perpetrator of cruel and sanguinary deeds. Jamadagni, though a peaceful Brahmin who excelled in the study of the Vedas, as desired by his mother, was not without martial equipment, for "the entire science of arms with the four kinds of magical missiles spontaneously came to him, who rivalled the sun in lustre, without any instruction from anybody" (B. 3. 115. 45). Jamadagni married Reṇukā, daughter of king Prasenajit. She gave birth to five sons: Rumāṇvat, Suṣeṇa, Vasu, Viśvāvasu, and last but not least Rāma. The family lived happily for some time. Then one day when Reṇukā of rigid vows happened to see Citraratha, the handsome king of Mārttikāvataka, sporting in water with his numerous wives, her fortitude forsook her and she felt the pangs of desire. When she returned to the hermitage, Jamadagni noticed her pollution and guessed her secret. In a fit of rage he called in turn upon each of his sons to kill their unchaste mother. Four of them refused to do the atrocious deed and were cursed by the angry and disappointed father for their disobedience. Then came the last of all that "slayer of hostile heroes," Rāma Jāmadagnya. A military type, accustomed to receive and obey orders, Rāma, when sternly commanded by his father to slay his mother, took his axe and without hesitation chopped off his mother's head! Jamadagni, mightily pleased with the instant obedience of his son, granted Rāma several boons, among them the boon that the mother whom Rāma had decapitated might be restored to life. And the family lived again happily for some time. Then one day Arjuna Kārtavīrya Sahasrabāhu came to the hermitage and was hospitably received by the Bhārgavas. The ungrateful king, intoxicated with the pride of power, not heeding the hospitality, seized and carried off by force from the hermitage the calf of the sacred cow of the sage (a variant of the *kāmadhenu* motif of the Vasiṣṭha-Viśvāmitra legend), and spitefully broke the big tree in the hermitage grounds. This was the beginning of a terrible feud. Rāma first slew the arrogant Arjuna Kārtavīrya, and Arjuna's sons then slew the unresisting Jamadagni. Then Rāma slaughtered the sons of Arjuna K. and finally destroyed all Kṣatriyas off the earth thrice seven times and made five pools of blood in Samantapañcaka (B. 3. 117. 9):

> *triḥsaptakṛtvaḥ pṛthivīṃ kṛtvā niḥkṣatriyāṃ prabhuḥ* |  
> *Samantapañcake pañca cakāra rudhirahradān* || (III)

Standing in the middle of these pools of blood—as has already been nar-[[P297]]rated several times above—Rāma offered oblations to the manes until at last his ancestor Ṛcīka appeared and stopped him. Rāma then performed a great sacrifice to gratify Indra, in which he bestowed the earth upon Kaśyapa, his priest. Then this annihilator of the Kṣatriya race was at last satisfied and retired to Mount Mahendra, engaging himself in austerities of a rather severe type. "Thus did hostility arise between Rāma and Kṣatriyas of this earth, and the entire earth was conquered by Rāma of immeasurable lustre" (B. 3. 117. 15). It is then narrated that the Bhārgava Rāma appeared there in person on Mount Mahendra to meet the Pāṇḍavas. He was duly received and honoured by Yudhiṣṭhira and his party, and he honoured them in turn.

This account has been amplified in later times—like several other Bhārgava episodes—by the addition of a passage of 23 lines (B. 3. 115. 9-19), which is prefixed to it and which is chiefly of interest on account of the vague suggestion it contains to the effect that Bhārgava Rāma was an *avatāra* of Viṣṇu. This interpolation begins with the previous history of Arjuna Kārtavīrya, king of Haihayas. He is represented here as a worshipper of Dattātreya, by whose favour he had obtained a golden *vimāna* and a wonderful chariot. Intoxicated with the pride of power, Arjuna Kārtavīrya insulted Indra, trampled upon the sages and even upon the celestials, and persecuted all creatures. Thereupon the celestials and the sages met together and went in a body to Viṣṇu to ask for his protection. Then the exalted god (Viṣṇu) held a consultation with Indra. The god of gods (Indra) told Viṣṇu what had to be done. Thereupon the exalted god, promising to do the needful, went to Badarī, his favourite retreat. Here the introduction suddenly breaks off, and the story narrated about Gādhi and Ṛcīka begins (B. 3. 115. 20). The suggestion probably is that at the consultation between Indra and Viṣṇu it was decided that Viṣṇu should incarnate himself on the earth as the son of Jamadagni, as Rāma Jāmadagnya, who should, in the fulness of time, slay Arjuna Kārtavīrya, but that is left unsaid. The passage is missing in the entire Southern recension and in some Northern manuscripts including those of the Kaśmīrī version. There can therefore be no doubt about its being a comparatively recent interpolation. [[P298]] As already remarked above, Rāma Jāmadagnya and the other Bhārgavas such as Cyavana, Ṛcīka and so on are generally used as static figures, along with other ancient sages like Nārada, in the description of largely attended and important meetings and state functions, and such treatment of these characters is quite intelligible, if not natural. But the Bhārgavas—and especially the Bhārgava Rāma—are accorded a somewhat different treatment; they are represented as taking part in the action more definitely and more frequently. We have seen that the Bhārgava Rāma is said to have given all his *astras* to Droṇa. He is also said to have taught Bhīṣma and Karṇa. Here he is represented as having shown himself to the Pāṇḍavas, as a special favour. In another context Rāma is said to have fought with Bhīṣma, a fight which lasted for twenty-three days but was absolutely barren of any consequence. Elsewhere also we shall find Rāma and some of other Bhārgavas represented as taking some innocuous part in the action, which in no way affects the course of events but which serves to establish and maintain contact between the Bhārgavas and the epic characters.

The above story of Rāma, which is miscalled the Kārtavīryopākhyāna, ends at adhy. 117 of the Vulgate. At adhy. 122, we have another Bhārgava story, which covers adhy. 122-124 and about half of adhy. 125 the story of the great wizard Cyavana, son of Bhṛgu.

The Pāṇḍavas reach the Payoṣṇī and the Narmadā rivers and hear from Lomaśa the story (*upākhyāna*) of Cyavana: how he demanded in marriage a young princess, by name Sukanyā, who had innocently and unwittingly blinded him; how he recovered his sight by the grace of the Aśvins and how he gave them on that account that Soma libation, paralyzing the arm of Indra, who would have prevented it. The story runs thus.

Cyavana, son of Bhṛgu, practised austerities in a forest so long that an ant-hill was formed round him. There came one day to that place king Śaryāti, accompanied by his daughter Sukanyā, with beautiful eyebrows and tapering thighs. The sage imprisoned within the ant-hill gazed longingly at the youthful princess, clad in a single garment and adorned with costly ornaments, and addressed some words to her which she did not hear. Sukanyā saw, however, the gleaming eyes of the sage, engaged in self-mortification in the ant-hill, and mistaking them for a species of glow-worm, in youthful heedlessness, pierced the eyes of the sage with a thorn. Little did she think of the dire consequences of her childish act. For through the anger of the offended sage, smarting with the pain thoughtlessly inflicted on him by the heedless princess, the king's entire army suffered suddenly from a complete stoppage of urine and excreta. The bewildered king inquired about the cause of this strange mishap, but none of his soldiers and companions could enlighten him. The occurrence remained a mystery until the guilty princess confessed her misdemeanour. Śaryāti forthwith set out to pacify the irate sage. The sage would relent only if the mischievous but fascinating princess is given to him in marriage. Without reflecting, the king agreed to bestow his beautiful daughter on the high-souled Cyavana and returned to his own city. Some time later the Aśvins saw the faultless Sukanyā bathing in the lake adjoining the hermitage of the sage. They also were smitten by her ravishing beauty and asked her to accept one of them for her husband instead of the blind old sage. As she would not consent, they propose that they would rejuvenate Cyavana, and then she should choose. With the permission of her husband she consents to the second proposal. Cyavana had to dip into the waters of the lake, into the primordial element, the womb of all creation, along with the Aśvins (Fountain of Youth motif).[^298_1] The three of [[P299]] them came out of the water, all looking exactly alike. Here is a dilemma (Nala-Damayantī motif). By virtue of her unswerving loyalty to her husband, Sukanyā is however able to choose the right man. In gratefulness for the gift of youth and beauty, Cyavana promises the Aśvins a draught of the Soma juice during a regular sacrifice. Soon afterwards, Śaryāti comes to visit his son-in-law Cyavana and the latter arranges a great sacrifice for Śaryāti, at which he offers the first draught of Soma to the Aśvins, who used to be altogether excluded on these festive occasions on account of their being medicine-men. Indra tries to stop the sacrilegious act; but as Cyavana will not heed, Indra then attempts to hurl the thunderbolt at him. But Cyavana was too quick for him. Instantly Cyavana paralyzed Indra's arm and brought him to his knees. At the same time the great sorcerer created by his magic a terrible demon (*kṛtyā*) called Mada (Intoxication). When Mada rushes towards Indra to slay him, Indra grants the wish of Cyavana, who triumphantly continues the sacrifice and gives the Aśvins, the promised libation of Soma. Since that time the Aśvins participate regularly in the sacrificial offerings on a basis of equality with the other gods. Indra at the same time apologizes and explains that he had opposed Cyavana merely to spread the fame of Cyavana and his father-in-law Śaryāti throughout the world: a significant and prophetic utterance.

Bhṛgu, the father of Cyavana, had only cursed Agni, a minor god, in fact, merely the "mouth" of the gods, to be *sarvabhakṣa,* devourer of all things, good and bad (1. 6. 13). Cyavana did even better. He thoroughly humbled Indra, the king of gods, who had to submit to the will of Cyavana.

In the next chapter again we have a passing allusion to a Bhārgava, who remains unnamed. The background is a Bhārgava hermitage, though the main actors are not Bhṛgus. The pious Yuvanāśva Saudyumni is practising austerities for the sake of progeny. One night he became very thirsty. Searching for water, he enters the hermitage of the Bhārgava who was engaged in performing some magical rites in order to make Yuvanāśva's queen give birth to a son. This sorcerer had actually prepared a potion, endowed with magical efficacy, for administering it to the queen and kept the jar containing the dose in a corner of the hermitage. The thirsty king found it, and, not knowing that the water was charmed and intended in fact for the queen, drained the potion to the dregs. Here was a mess. But the potion prepared by a Bhṛgu is infallible in its effect. Whoever drinks it must give birth to a son. Consequently the king became himself pregnant, and a son, Māndhātṛ, was born to him, ripping open his left side, but owing to some propitiatory rites performed by the Bhṛgu, Yuvanāśva himself escaped unhurt. [[P300]] It is interesting to compare this version of the story of Māndhātṛ with the one which occurs in the Droṇaparvan (adhy. 62 of the Vulgate). There we are told that once upon a time king Yuvanāśva, when out hunting, became thirsty, and his steed was exhausted. Seeing at a distance a curl of smoke, the monarch guided by it reached a sacrificial enclosure and found there some sacrificial butter (*ājya*), which he greedily swallowed. Thereupon the king became pregnant and was delivered of a son (Māndhātṛ) by the Aśvins. The rest of the story is nearly the same.

In this version, king Yuvanāśva was not practising austerities for securing the birth of a son, but had gone out hunting. Nor did he partake of the magical preparation at night in the dark, but presumably in full daylight, when the smoke from the sacred hearth could yet be seen by him. The second version moreover makes no mention of any Bhṛgu, playing the rôle of the officiating priest and saviour of Yuvanāśva, like the first, which is an important discrepancy. The second story is sketchy and lacking in definition, and appears to be the older version. In the first the details are filled out, by adding a Bhṛgu as an officiating priest and generally making the picture more realistic.

The next Bhārgava of importance we meet with in the Āraṇyaka is the sage Mārkaṇḍeya, whose discourses on the most divers topics extend over 51 chapters (182-232) in the Vulgate, containing about 2200 stanzas (Mārkaṇḍeya-samāsyā), which he delivers for the delectation and edification of the Pāṇḍavas. This is not his first visit to the Pāṇḍavas by any means. For early in the beginning of their exile, when the Pāṇḍavas had settled in the Dvaitavana Forest, Mārkaṇḍeya had paid a flying visit to them (adhy. 25). He turns up again, as a matter of fact, also towards the end of their exile, without notice or warning, to console Yudhiṣṭhira and relates to him the Rāmopākhyāna, the popular story of Rāma and Sītā, as well as the Sāvitryupākhyāna, that immortal story of a wife's splendid devotion. These two *upākhyānas*, narrated by Mārkaṇḍeya, together comprise about 1060 stanzas. Thus the Mārkaṇḍeya-samāsyā together with the two latter *upākhyānas* comprise 3260 stanzas, which is nearly one fourth of the entire extent of this extensive *parvan*.

Mārkaṇḍeya was one of the *cīrañjīvins*: eternally youthful though many thousand years old. How he was exactly connected with the two well-known Bhṛgu families of our Mahābhārata (Bhṛgu-Cyavana-Rāma and Bhṛgu-Cyavana-Śunaka) is not exactly known; but that he was a Bhārgava is beyond doubt. He is referred to as *Bhārgava* in B. 3. 183. 60; 189. 97; 190. 2. 13. 22. 15 as *Bhārgava-sattama* in B. 3. 201. 7; 217. 5 as *Bhṛgu-nandana* in B. 3. 205. 4; as *Bhṛgukula-śreṣṭha* in B. 3. 205. 15. Moreover Mārkaṇḍa is explicitly declared to be a *gotra* founder of the Bhṛgu clan in the Matsya Purāṇa (195. 20). [[P301]] Some of the subjects of Mārkaṇḍeya's discourses to the Pāṇḍavas are the following: great power of Brahmins; merit of benevolence to Brahmins; wife's duty to her husband; and different forms of Agni. He relates, among others, stories of Manu, Yayāti, Vṛṣadarbha, Śibi, Indradyumna (father of Janaka), Kuvalāśva and of Skanda Kārttikeya. He is also responsible for the famous story of the Righteous Hunter (*dharma-vyādha*) of Mithilā. Besides these, there is, as is well known, a whole Purāṇa named after him, the Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa.

The most interesting of Mārkaṇḍeya's stories, however, is how he actually witnessed the act of creation and dissolution in progress. We have here in fact in Mārkaṇḍeya a Brahmanic counterpart of the Kṣatriya Manu, that distant cousin of the Semitic Noah with his ark, seeds and so on.

The legend of Manu, like that of Noah, is a childish story. According to this legend (Matsyopākhyāna, also related by the same sage Mārkaṇḍeya, Āraṇyaka 187 in the Vulgate), Manu, son of Vivasvat, while saying his usual prayers on the bank of a river, sees a tiny little fish, which asks the sage to protect it. Manu rears the fish in a small earthen vessel, which the fish soon outgrows. The fish keeps on growing larger and larger. Manu places the fish successively in a tank, in the river Ganges, and in the ocean. Before parting from Manu, the fish warns him of the impending catastrophe and advises him to build an ark and keep carefully a store of *seeds* of all kinds. When the deluge comes, Manu gets into the ark with the Seven Sages. The ark is towed by the horned fish on the ocean, which during the deluge flooded everything. The ship, "like a drunken wench", staggered from side to side on the bosom of the agitated ocean. In the end the ship is fastened on to the peak of the Himalayas, called Naubandhana, which is projecting out of the water. When the flood subsides, Manu quietly gets out of the ark and, *as* he has all the necessary seeds with himself in the ark, there would be no difficulty in creating the world anew. Before parting again from Manu and the Seven Sages, the Fish says, "I am Brahmā, the lord of creatures. None is greater than I. In the form of a fish I have saved you all from this peril. Manu will create all beings: gods, *asuras* and human beings, the mobile and the immobile creation."

This story, which appears to belong to a different complex of myths and does not at all fit well in the Mahābhārata cycle, is, as has been surmised, probably of Semitic origin.[^301_1] If Manu creates all beings, Brahmā is thrown out of employment. The Puranic theory of creation is that there is a deluge; nothing remains of the universe except Viṣṇu-Nārāyaṇa, reclining on the coils of the Eternal Serpent (Śeṣa-Ananta) floating on the waters. Then out of Nārāyaṇa's navel emerges Brahmā, seated on a lotus, the creative aspect of the deity. From Brahmā are born his mind-born sons (*mānasa-putrās*). Then other beings, male and female, emerge from his heart, breast, thumbs and so on. These are the Prajāpatis. They propagate this world of ours. The process is repeated at each dissolution: it is an eternal recurrence. In this complex there is clearly no room for the Semitic legend, which would imply a parallel creation by Manu, a state of things which is not at all what is intended by the legend. Since a variant version of this legend is found even in the Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa (1. 8. 1), it should seem that the Semitic legend was introduced into India at a fairly early date but has remained unassimilated. Its exotic character, however, appears to me to be clearly betrayed by the *phalaśruti* at the end of the chap-[[P302]]ter, an addition which accompanies all late accretions to the Great Epic (B. 3. 187. 58 *emended*):

> *ya idaṃ śṛṇuyān nityaṃ Manoś caritam āditaḥ* |  
> *sa sukhī sarvasiddhārthaḥ svargalokaṃ iyān naraḥ* ||

The Indian Noah is a man of a very different character. He requires neither boat nor horned fish to save him; nor does he keep a store of seeds with himself. The man who could live through the dissolution of the world can only be a perfect Yogī; and a perfect Yogī is deathless. "There is none equal to you in years save Brahmā Parameṣṭhin," says Yudhiṣṭhira to the Bhārgava Mārkaṇḍeya. But he requires neither food nor drink to live. He can walk on water as easily as on land. So when the world was overwhelmed with floods and the creation was gradually submerged, Mārkaṇḍeya found himself alone, walking on the waters of the ocean. After some time Mārkaṇḍeya, being human after all, begins to feel a little tired and lonely, tramping about all by himself on the surface of the endless ocean. He also felt inexpressibly sad at that awful destruction. Then all of a sudden he noticed a little child resting on the extended branch of a huge banyan tree (*nyagrodha*). Mārkaṇḍeya could not at all imagine how that little helpless child could have survived all that cataclysmal devastation, and he kept pondering over that matter, standing near the child. Seeing his confusion, the child softly told him to go into his body and rest there, and the child opened its little mouth and drew him gently inside. And, lo and behold, inside the child he found the world whose destruction he had seen with his own eyes. The sun, the moon and the stars, all the oceans, seas and rivers of the world, all the men, women and children whom he had known, all animals, gods and demons, they were all there, inside the little stomach of that wonderful little child. He wandered about inside for hundreds of years and still he could not find the end of it all, when he suddenly found [[P303]] himself outside the child, blown out by his gentle exhalation. Then the child spoke to the sage, and then it suddenly dawned on Mārkaṇḍeya who the Child was. He sees and recognizes God.[^303_1]

As this Brahmin Noah had no need for the ark, he had no need for any seeds. The seeds are there permanently. There had been in fact no destruction at all: that destruction was an illusion. There was only an involution: the world had been only withdrawn into the interior of God. Creation, moreover, was not Mārkaṇḍeya's concern: it was the business of Brahmā. Like the seed which has been well planted, the universe will grow of itself, putting forth in due time blossoms and fruits and other seeds. Mārkaṇḍeya, the Yogī, is interested only in knowing and understanding things. He had seen God, but that is not sufficient for him. He wants to know God, know about His nature and character, His Māyā, that Māyā which had not been understood even by the gods themselves (B. 3. 188. 135):

> *Jñātuṃ icchāmi deva tvāṃ māyāṃ caitāṃ tavottamām* |

The divine Child declares itself to be Nārāyaṇa, the indestructible source of the world, and reveals to Mārkaṇḍeya His real nature and character.

The Bhārgava Mārkaṇḍeya is, according to this account, the only man who had survived the last deluge, witnessed the act of dissolution and creation in progress, stood in his own person face to face with Nārāyaṇa in the utter solitude of total annihilation, but it is nowhere made clear why Mārkaṇḍeya was singled out for this unique honour: it is an unmotivated theme. It is left to us to infer that the Bhārgava Mārkaṇḍeya is the only perfect Yogī that ever lived.

A little later, as already mentioned, Mārkaṇḍeya relates to the Pāṇḍavas the famous Rāmopākhyāna (Āraṇyaka 273-292 in the Vulgate), an abridgement of the Rāma story in about 750 stanzas. The occasion for relating the story arises in the following way.

Jayadratha, a near relative of the Kurus and the Pāṇḍavas tries to carry off Draupadī, but is defeated and captured, and ultimately pardoned and released. Yudhiṣṭhira mourns his fate [[P304]] and asks Mārkaṇḍeya, who seems to be rather abruptly introduced for the purpose of the story, if there is any mortal more unfortunate than himself. Thereupon Mārkaṇḍeya relates the story of the Dāśarathi Rāma. Now the entire story of the attempted rape of Draupadī by Jayadratha is so ill conceived and unconvincing that it appears to have been invented solely for the purpose of introducing a summary of the Rāmāyaṇa. Who could be now a better narrator of the story of Rāma than the Bhārgava Mārkaṇḍeya, age-old and yet eternally young, the only man who had witnessed the happenings in this world in all the different ages, witnessed even the dissolution and creation of the world?

After hearing the story of Rāma, Yudhiṣṭhira, the "dummy" of the bard, says that he did not grieve so much on his own or his brothers' account as he did on account of the daughter of Drupada; and then asks Mārkaṇḍeya if he had ever seen or heard of a woman as devoted to her husband as Draupadī. To console Yudhiṣṭhira, Mārkaṇḍeya then relates the well-known story (*upākhyāna*) of Sāvitrī, who rescues her husband from death by the insistent importunity of her pleading, by her deep feminine intuition and by her unflinching devotion to her husband (Āraṇyaka 293-299 in the Vulgate). And that is the last episode of the Āraṇyaka narrated by the Bhārgava Mārkaṇḍeya and in fact the last episode of this *parvan* in which a Bhārgava is concerned.

## VIRĀṬAPARVAN

In the short Virāṭaparvan, as is in the Sabhā, the narrative is plain and straightforward, unembellished by any episodic enlargement, and the story marches rapidly forward. This book contains consequently no *upākhyānas* and there is no room for any Bhārgava digression. The references to the Bhārgavas are few and find between, and they are incidental allusions to the greatness or heroism of the Bhārgavas. One of these may be adduced for the purpose of illustration. Addressing Duryodhana, Bhīṣma asks: "Who is superior to Droṇa except Rāma, the son of Jamadagni?" (B. 4. 51, 10).[^304_1]

## UDYOGAPARVAN

The Udyogaparvan furnishes its quota of references to the Bhārgavas, at least to the Bhārgava Rāma. Here again Rāma Jāmadagnya emerges from the obscurity of myth and legend, and we find him coming into direct contact—and in one case, actual conflict—with some of the epic characters.

In adhy. 72 ff. of the Vulgate version of the Udyoga, we have an account of a council held by the Pāṇḍavas, where Kṛṣṇa is commissioned to go and treat with Dhṛtarāṣṭra, which is followed in adhy. 83 ff. by a description of Kṛṣṇa's journey to Hastināpura. On the way he meets a company of ancient sages, whom he duly honours. On his asking them whither they were bound, the Bhārgava Rāma, who is apparently their spokesman, explains that they were on their way to attend the council meeting which was going to be held at Hastināpura in order to witness the proceedings and listen to the discussion. The sages then take leave of him and proceed on their way. Led by Rāma Jāmadagnya, they arrive in due course at the capital of the Kurus and present themselves in the darbar hall, where they are received with due honours by Bhīṣma (adhy. 94). The proceedings begin with a long peroration by Kṛṣṇa, in which he announces that the Pāṇḍavas were ready to obey implicitly the commands of Dhṛtarāṣṭra, provided they were assured that they would be treated with fairness and given what is theirs by right (adhy. 95). The Bhārgava Rāma, taking advantage of the spell of silence which followed Kṛṣṇa's diplomatic speech, gets up and, advis-[[P305]]ing peace, relates, unasked, the story of Dambhodbhava (adhy. 96). The foolish king Dambhodbhava, who wants to be acknowledged the unconquered and unconquerable hero, challenges in his cupidity the sages Nara and Nārāyaṇa (who were then practising penance at Badarī) to fight with him. The ascetics meekly decline, but Dambhodbhava is importunate. So in the end Nara takes up a handful of grass and, charging the blades in his hand with mystic potency, flings them at the enemy. They change into deadly missiles, overpowering the soldiers of Dambhodbhava, and compel him to surrender and acknowledge his defeat. Nara reads Dambhodbhava a sermon on self-control, on kindness to all creatures and humility towards Brahmins. The Bhārgava Rāma appearing here in the rôle of a peace-maker concludes by advising conciliation and pointing out that Nara is Arjuna, while Nārāyaṇa is Kṛṣṇa. The story is an unnecessary digression, with the very obvious object of reiterating and emphasizing the identity between Nara-Nārāyaṇa and Arjuna-Kṛṣṇa.

The Udyogaparvan closes with a story (Ambopākhyāna), in which the Bhārgava Rāma plays a very active and prominent part (adhy. 173-196 of the Vulgate). Bhīṣma explains to Duryodhana that, because of a vow he had taken, he would not fight with Śikhaṇḍin, who at birth had been a girl, and then relates the whole life history of Śikhaṇḍin, who in a previous birth was Ambā, the daughter of the king of Kāśī. Bhīṣma narrates how Ambā, having been disappointed of marriage through Bhīṣma's action, vowed to compass his death and how the Bhārgava Rāma, having promised to help her, fought with Bhīṣma at Kurukṣetra for twenty-three days, a fight which ends in a stalemate. The story is developed in this way.

When Ambā was repulsed by Śālva, to whom she was engaged and who subsequently refused to marry her on account of her abduction by Bhīṣma, she left him and wandered about alone in a neighbouring forest, nursing her grief and vowing vengeance. There she meets a company of ascetics, who sympathize with her and devise means to help her. While the ascetics are cogitating as to how they should help her, there comes along by chance Ambā's grandfather, the royal sage Hotravāhana, who advises her to seek the help of his friend Rāma Jāmadagnya. While these deliberations are proceeding, Rāma's disciple and faithful follower Akṛtavraṇa appears on the scene. Hotravāhana tells him the previous history of Ambā and also her future plans. Akṛtavraṇa decides that Bhīṣma is certainly responsible for Ambā's misfortunes, and is the party deserving punishment. By a fortunate accident Rāma—on the war-path, armed with a bow and a sword and his famous axe (*paraśu*)—comes there the following morning. Ambā again relates the whole story of her unfortunate life to the Bhārgava Rāma and beseeches him to slay the offending Bhīṣma. But since Rāma has taken the vow that he would on no account take up arms except at the bidding of the twice-born, he has to be persuaded by the sages to espouse Ambā's cause. He then proceeds with Ambā and all the assembled sages to the banks of the Sarasvatī and from there sends a message to Bhīṣma, who meets him at the boundary of the Kuru kingdom. Rāma orders Bhīṣma to take back Ambā or failing that fight a duel with him. Since Bhīṣma cannot do the former, he decides to fight, goes back to the city and returns, furnished with all arms and accoutrements, in a chariot made of silver, drawn by white horses. Bhīṣma's mother Gaṅgādevī (identified with the river Ganges) tries to stop the impending fight but without success. The fight lasts for several days, when at last Rāma wounded by an arrow of Bhīṣma falls down in a swoon. Bhīṣma stops fighting: it is a gentlemanly duel, following minutely all the strict rules of chivalry, and unlike the deadly combats of the Bhārata. The fight [[P306]] is continued on the following days, with varying luck. Even after many days of constant fighting, in which millions and billions of arrows are showered by each combatant and cut up by the opponent, various magical missiles are flung by which alternately the combatants get wounded, fall down, recover and resume the fight, the grim contest continues indecisively. Then one night Bhīṣma, who was one of the Vasus, saw in a dream a group of eight Brahmins (the Eight Vasus), who had supported him and encouraged him that same day while he was lying wounded and unconscious on the battlefield. They remind him of a magical missile of his, by discharging which he could put the Bhārgava Rāma to sleep on the field of battle. Next day the fight began again and the combatants hurled at each other simultaneously the terrific Brahma missile, which is capable of shattering the earth. The two missiles clash in the middle and neutralize each other. During the commotion caused by these weapons, Bhīṣma thinks of the sleep missile. As he is about to discharge that missile, the gods intervene. With Bhīṣma's mother, Gaṅgā, the gods go from one to the other of the combatants, trying to pacify them. Seeing that neither of them is prepared to yield and be the first to retire from the field of battle, the gods stand between the combatants and make the fight impossible. Still the combatants are not pacified and will not leave the field. Finally the shades of his ancestors persuade Rāma to lay aside his weapons, which he then reluctantly does. That is sufficient for Bhīṣma. He puts down his bow and arrow, goes to Rāma, his *guru*, and prostrates himself at his feet. They soon forget their quarrel and become friends again. Thus this titanic conflict between Bhīṣma and the Bhārgava Rāma, which is said to have lasted for three and twenty days, is utterly barren of any result beyond adding a few hundred lines to the text! [[P307]] One peculiar thing we notice about this story is the sudden change of heart on the part of the Bhārgava Rāma. While in all other accounts of him he is represented as the inveterate foe of the Kṣatriyas and the epic bards are never weary of telling us that he had exterminated the Kṣatriyas thrice seven times, here we find him befriending the royal sage Hotravāhana and championing the lost cause of an unhappy Kṣatriya damsel! The episode shows another inconsistency in the behaviour of Rāma; for, here we are surprised with the statement that in Bhīṣma Rāma had taken a *Kṣatriya* pupil and had apparently taught him so well that the pupil knew not only as much as the *guru* but perhaps even more. This does not prevent him subsequently from cursing Karṇa, who had learnt the secrets of the science of arms from Rāma in the guise of a Brahmin but later had to confess that he was a Kṣatriya. There Rāma is reported to have said to Karṇa that the Brahma weapon can never be learnt by one who is not a Brahmin (B. 12. 3. 31), though Bhīṣma had used the Brahma missile successfully against Rāma in the combat mentioned above.

## BHĪṢMAPARVAN

With the Bhīṣmaparvan begin what may be called the "battle books," which in some shape or other must have formed the kernel of the Mahābhārata, which kernel has served as a nucleus for the growth of a vast amount of secondary material, cohering together so as to form a more or less harmonious whole. A rough sketch of the original plan of the epic is preserved in a stanza occurring in one of the chapters of the first book (1. 55. 43):

> *evam etat purāvṛttaṃ teṣām akliṣṭakarmaṇām* |  
> *bhedo rājyavināśaś ca jayaś ca jayatāṃ vara* ||

The Bhārata, according to this statement, was a trilogy consisting of the story of the dissension, loss of the kingdom, and victory, among some descendants of Bharata.

The Bhīṣmaparvan, according to the Vulgate, is divided into four sections (*upaparvans*). Of these the first two are mainly geographical tractates: Jambūkhaṇḍa-nirmāṇa-parvan and Bhūmi-parvan. The third is the famous philosophical discourse, the Bhagavadgītā, which is, so to say, the keystone of the whole new superstructure of the remodelled Bhārata and which has passed into world literature. The fourth and last section of this book is a lengthy account in eighty chapters (or about 4300 stanzas) of the fight of the first ten days of the Great War, up to the fall of Bhīṣma. After the Bhagavadgītā, the account of the fight runs on smoothly and is not allowed to be interrupted by any digressions. Consequently this sub-section also contains no Bhārgava episode or for that matter any other episodic narrative at all. But passing allusions to the Bhārgavas are not by any means wanting even in this final section of the Bhīṣmaparvan. They are, however, for the most part trivial and confined to the glorification of Rāma Jāmadagnya, playing on the theme of his encounter with Bhīṣma. The Bhārgava Rāma is subtly praised by saying that Bhīṣma was a hero whom even Rāma could not defeat.

But the Bhagavadgītā itself contains an interesting allusion to the Bhṛgus and that is in the tenth chapter, in the enumeration of the so-called *vibhūtis* of Śrī-Kṛṣṇa. The *vibhūtis* are said to be infinite (*nāsty anto vistarasya me*, Gītā 10. 19 in the Vulgate version), but about sixty of them have been specifically enumerated and they are worthy of close study. Some of these *vibhūtis* are pure and simple gods, such as Indra, Viṣṇu, Śiva and so on. Some are yet other supernatural beings, such as Kubera, Citraratha and others. Some are celestial luminaries such as the Sun, and the Moon. Some are merely terrestrial features such as mountains, rivers, the ocean and so on. Some are even animals such as the serpent (Śeṣa), elephant (Airāvata), eagle (Garuḍa) and so on. There are mentioned among these *vibhūtis* only nine human—or at least semi-human, that is, semi-divine—beings, whom we may regard as historical or semi-historical personalities. Three of them, Vāsudeva, Arjuna and Vyāsa, are well-known and important epic characters, and as such their inclusion in this list is expected and may be said to be quite natural. They may therefore be ignored. Then, further, of divine sages (*devarṣis*), Śrī-Kṛṣṇa declares himself to be Nārada, the official messenger between the gods and the men. Of perfected beings (*Siddhas*), Śrī-Kṛṣṇa says, he is Kapila, a celebrated sage, probably the codifier of the Sāṃkhya, the system most popular with the epic bards. Of household priests, Śrī-Kṛṣṇa identifies himself, quite naturally again, with Bṛhaspati, the priest of the gods, [[P308]] one of the Aṅ-[[P308]]girases, a clan closely connected with the Bhṛgus from very ancient times. There remain three; of these all—or at least two—are clearly Bhārgavas. Of Kavis, Śrī-Kṛṣṇa says, he is Śukra, the Bhārgava priest of the Asuras, the asuric counterpart of Bṛhaspati. Of weapon-bearers (*śastra-bhṛt*), Śrī-Kṛṣṇa declares himself to be Rāma, who is identified by some authorities as Rāma son of Daśaratha, but who in my opinion is meant to be no other than the much lauded hero of the Mahābhārata poets, Rāma son of Jamadagni, the Bhārgava Rāma. Lastly, of great sages (*maharṣis*), Śrī-Kṛṣṇa says he is Bhṛgu (*maharṣīṇāṃ Bhṛgur aham*, Gītā 10. 25). All other *vibhūtis* are more or less intelligible; for each *vibhūti* is or may be regarded, more or less, as the foremost or the first of a class; but why Bhṛgu should be considered as the *greatest of the great sages* (*Maharṣis*) is somewhat enigmatic.[^308_1] He is not reckoned among the Seven Sages (*saptarṣis*). He is no doubt said to be a son of Brahmā, but Brahmā had nearly a dozen sons of that kind, who all became Prajāpatis and founders of *gotras*. And about Bhṛgu's greatness even the Mahābhārata has nothing to narrate beyond the fact that his wife Pulomā was abducted by a cannibal called Puloman (Ādi) or Daṃśa (Śānti), and that he had cursed various people.

## DROṆAPARVAN

The Droṇaparvan supplies what is for our purpose one of the most interesting of Bhārgava references in the Mahābhārata.

On the thirteenth day of the Great War during Arjuna's temporary absence, Abhimanyu with a small following pierces the Kaurava ring-formation (*cakra-vyūha*), but Jayadratha intercepts his followers and isolates him, and Abhimanyu is slain after a brave fight; one of the most tragic episodes of the Great Epic. To console Yudhiṣṭhira for the untimely death of Abhimanyu, Vyāsa tells him many stories illustrating the transitoriness of human life. At that time he relates how Nārada comforted Sṛñjaya in a time of bereavement by telling him of the sixteen kings of great merit, who nevertheless all died when their time came (adhy. 55-71 of the Vulgate). These kings were, as a matter of fact, all *cakravartins*, sovereigns who had conquered surrounding kingdoms or brought them under their sway and established a paramount position on more or less extensive regions around their own kingdoms. The episode, which is known as the Ṣoḍaśarājakīya, recounts the heroic deeds and the meritorious actions of sixteen of such famous kings of antiquity. The sixteen kings are these: (1) Marutta, son of Avikṣit; (2) Suhotra Ātithina; (3) Paurava (Bṛhadratha, king of Aṅga); (4) Śibi, son of Uśīnara; (5) Rāma, son of Daśaratha; (6) Bhagīratha, son of Dilīpa; (7) Dilīpa Ailavila; (8) Māndhātṛ, son of Yuvanāśva; (9) Yayāti, son of Nahuṣa; (10) Ambarīṣa, son of Nābhāga; (11) Śaśabindhu, son of Citraratha; (12) Gaya, son of Amūrtarayas; (13) Rantideva, son of Saṃkṛti; (14) Bharata, son of Duḥṣanta; (15) Pṛthu, son of Vena; and, last but not least, (16) the Bhārgava Rāma, son of Jamadagni. [[P309]] Accordingly we have here a vivid and colourful description of that great feat of the Bhārgava Rāma, the extirpation of Kṣatriyas, an account which courts mistrust by its appalling exaggeration and staggering figures (adhy. 70 of the Vulgate). We are told how Rāma took a vow to relieve the Earth of her burden of Kṣatriyas. Thereafter he first slew Kārtavīrya, who was never before defeated in battle. Then of Kṣatriyas he slaughtered 64,000, cutting off their ears and noses and breaking their teeth, besides stifling in smoke 7000 Haihayas (the clan to which Arjuna Kārtavīrya belonged) and torturing them, and butchering 10,000 with his own axe. Then the puissant son of Jamadagni, marching against the Kāśmīras, the Daradas, the Kuntis, the Kṣudrakas and Mālavas, the Aṅgas, Vaṅgas and Kaliṅgas, the Videhas, the Tāmraliptakas, the Rakṣovāhas, the Vītihotras, the Trigartas, the Mārttikāvatas, the Śibis and other warrior races, thousands in number, slew them all with arrows of exceeding sharpness. Going from country to country, he slew [[P310]] thousands and hundreds of thousands of Kṣatriyas, creating a veritable deluge of blood and filling many lakes with it. Then bringing under his sway all the eighteen divisions of the earth, that descendant of Bhṛgu celebrated a hundred sacrifices, like a second Indra, when he gave away costly gifts (*dakṣiṇā*) to Brahmins. The sacrificial altar, full eight *nalas* high and made entirely of gold, embellished with hundreds of gems and adorned with thousands of banners, as also this earth abounding in domestic and wild animals, was accepted by Kaśyapa from the Bhārgava Rāma as his sacrificial fee for performing the sacrifice. Rāma also gave him many thousands of huge elephants adorned with golden ornaments. Freeing the earth of robbers that infested her, making her full of righteous and amiable people, Rāma gave the earth to Kaśyapa at his great horse sacrifice. Then comes the Bhārgava slogan (B. 7. 70. 20):

> *triḥsaptakṛtvaḥ pṛthivīṃ kṛtvā niḥkṣatriyāṃ prabhuḥ* (IV)

Having cleared the earth of Kṣatriyas thrice seven times, having celebrated a hundred sacrifices, Rāma gave the earth to the Brahmins. When the earth with her seven grand divisions was bestowed by him upon Kaśyapa, then the latter said to Rāma, "Go thou out of this earth at my command!" Hearing these words of Kaśyapa, that foremost of weapon-bearers, obedient to the command of a Brahmin, caused the ocean to roll back and to give him a new strip of land to live in, and Rāma took up his abode on Mount Mahendra.

It is instructive to compare this Story of Sixteen Kings with a variant version of it in the Śānti (adhy. 29 of the Vulgate), as related to the same Yudhiṣṭhira by Śrī-Kṛṣṇa. After the battle the month of mourning is spent outside the capital on the banks of the Ganges. Yudhiṣṭhira, very dejected, proposes to renounce the kingdom and retire to the forest. At Arjuna's request, Kṛṣṇa tries to console him and so relates to him the Story of Sixteen Kings, which Nārada had once related to king Sṛñjaya. The stories are naturally almost the same as those related to Yudhiṣṭhira by Vyāsa after the death of Abhimanyu. There is, however, one very striking difference. Fifteen of the kings in the list are the same; the sixteenth "king" of the Droṇa list, namely, the Bhārgava Rāma, is conspicuous by his absence in the Śānti list! He is replaced by a real king, Sagara, son of Ikṣvāku, who was indeed a very famous king, fully deserving to be included in this list of the celebrated sixteen kings of antiquity, whereas the Bhārgava Rāma was no king at all and does not properly fall into this enumeration. His "extermination" of the Kṣatriyas was merely an act of vendetta. And although he is said to have conquered the whole earth, he never was crowned a king. Therefore the propriety of including his exploits in the Ṣoḍaśarājakīya is more than questionable. In fact it would never strike anybody except an unscrupulous Brahmin redactor—with strong Bhārgava leanings—to perpetrate such a tendentious perversion and father it upon Vyāsa.

## KARṆAPARVAN

Karṇa is represented in our epic as a pupil of the Bhārgava Rāma, like Bhīṣma and Droṇa. So there are several casual references—in his capacity as the *guru* of Karṇa—to Rāma Jāmadagnya in the course of this parvan.

In adhy. 31 (of the Vulgate), we have a reference to the bow (Vijaya) which Karṇa had received from the Bhārgava Rāma, who in his turn had obtained it from Indra himself. Indra had used it in his fight with the Daityas; Rāma had used it in his campaign against the Kṣatriyas of the earth, which he had conquered thrice seven times (B. 8. 31. 46):

> *triḥsaptakṛtvaḥ pṛthivī dhanuṣā yena nirjitā* | (V)

On the seventeenth day of the war, Duryodhana persuades Śalya to be Karṇa's charioteer and to encourage him tells the story how Karṇa had become possessed even of celestial weapons through the Bhārgava Rāma.

To emphasize further the great importance of Karṇa, Duryodhana then narrates a story which shows the greatness of Karṇa's *guru,* Rāma Jāmadagnya (adhy. 34 of the Vulgate). Rāma is generally represented in the Mahābhārata as a man—or rather a Superman—who had fought his battles on this earth with other human beings like himself. Here we are told that he had fought with and vanquished even the Daityas. The story is this. To obtain celestial weapons from Mahādeva, Rāma (like the Pāṇḍava Arjuna later) was practising terrible austerities. At that time the Asuras had become so powerful [[P311]] that even all the gods together could not subdue them, and so Mahādeva asks the Bhārgava Rāma to fight with them (as Arjuna later fought with the Nivātakavacas and other demons). Rāma went up to the Asuras and said to them, "Most invincible in battle as you are, O Daityas, give me battle". Then the Daityas began to fight with Rāma. Then that delighter of the Bhārgava clan slaughtered those Daityas on the battle-field by strokes that were like the strokes from Indra's thunderbolt. After Rāma had vanquished the invincible Asuras without the use of any special weapons, then Mahādeva gave him those celestial missiles for which Rāma was practising the terrible austerities. Perhaps feeling that the story might be disbelieved, Duryodhana hastens to add that he had heard it himself from the lips of a pious and truthful Brahmin while the latter was relating it to king Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Duryodhana's father.

Then in adhy. 42 (of the Vulgate), Karṇa relates that under the guise of a Brahmin he had been a disciple of the Bhārgava Rāma in order to learn from him the secret of certain magical missiles known to Rāma alone. One day while Rāma was sleeping with his head resting in the lap of Karṇa, the thigh of the latter was bored through by Indra (Arjuna's *de facto* father) in the form of a ferocious centipede, and Karṇa was weltering in blood but did not move a muscle, for fear of disturbing the sleep of his *guru* and thus incurring his displeasure. When Rāma woke up and saw this state of things, he concluded that his disciple was no Brahmin, as only a Kṣatriya could suffer such agony and keep still. Then Karṇa confesses his guilt and begs Rāma's pardon. Rāma pronounces a curse on Karṇa, saying that at the critical moment the magical missiles of which he had obtained knowledge from Rāma by such a dastardly trick—even the great Yogī could not see through it—would fail him. Brahma could never reside firmly in one who is not a Brahmin: *abrāhmaṇe brahma na hi dhruvaṃ syāt* (B. 8. 42. 9). And so it happened, needless to say.

In a variant version of this tale (Śānti 3 in the Vulgate) the worm which had bored through Karṇa's thigh is said to have been not Indra in disguise, but a demon suffering the effects of a curse pronounced on him by Bhṛgu!

[[P312]]
## ŚALYAPARVAN

In the Śalyaparvan there are only stray references to the Bhārgavas, especially in the account of Balarāma's pilgrimage—another very obvious digression—during which Balarāma visits of course all the places sacred to the Bhārgavas such as Rāmatīrtha, Samantapañcaka and so on, which lay on his way.

At Rāmatīrtha we have a repetition of the story that Kaśyapa officiated at the sacrifice celebrated by Rāma Bhārgava after conquering the whole earth and annihilating the Kṣatriyas (B. 9. 49. 7 f.):

> *yatra Rāmo mahābhāgo Bhārgavaḥ sumahātapāḥ* ||  
> *asakṛt pṛthivīṃ jitvā hatakṣatriyapuṃgavām* |  
> *upādhyāyaṃ puraskṛtya Kaśyapaṃ munisattamam* ||  
> *ayajad vājapeyena so 'śvamedhaśatena ca*  
> *pradadau dakṣiṇāṃ caiva pṛthivīṃ vai sasāgarām* ||

## SAUPTIKAPARVAN

The Sauptika is one of the few books of the Mahābhārata which are entirely, or almost entirely, free from reference to the Bhārgavas. The book is short, consisting of 18 chapters and about 800 stanzas in the Vulgate version, and comprises only two *sub-parvans*: the Sauptika and the Aiṣīka. The first *sub-parvan* describes the slaughter of the sleepers in the camp of the Pāṇḍavas, while the second gives an account of the use of the world-destroying dart Aiṣīka by Aśvatthāman.

## STRĪPARVAN

In the next book, the Strīparvan, which like the former is short, consisting of 27 chapters and about 800 stanzas in the Vulgate version, there are only three incidental references to the Bhārgavas. The *parvan* consists almost wholly of the description of the obsequial ceremonies of the warriors killed in the war and lamentations of women over their dead kinsfolk, which is fortunately held free from digressions and interpolations. The tragedy also does not permit the development of any other sentiment. The absence of reference to the Bhārgavas, who, as already remarked, had strictly speaking no connection whatsoever with the Kuru-Pañcāla heroes, is not only thoroughly appropriate, but is an omission [[P313]] for which we may be truly grateful to the redactors of our Mahābhārata.

## ŚĀNTIPARVAN

The Śānti, which is in essence a manual of instruction in king-craft (*rājadharma*), conduct in time of calamity (*āpaddharma*) and emancipation (*mokṣadharma*) compiled in the peculiar pedagogic technique developed by the redactors of the Great Epic for the edification of the people combined with their entertainment, supplies its quota of Bhārgava material, making up in some measures for the deficiency of the last three books.

Already in adhy. 2 f. (of the Vulgate) we hear of the Bhārgava Rāma. The month of mourning is spent by the Pāṇḍavas outside the capital on the banks of the Ganges. There Nārada relates to Yudhiṣṭhira the story of the early career of Karṇa, which is here said to be a secret of the gods (*devaguhya*). In the course of the narrative Nārada repeats with more details the story we have already noticed as to how Karṇa had easily deceived the Bhārgava Rāma and obtained from him the carefully guarded secret of the famous Brahma missile (*brahmāstra*) under the false pretence of being a Brahmin, and a Bhṛgu too. An interesting point of difference between this version of the story and that given in the Karṇaparvan is, as mentioned already, that the worm which bites Karṇa and bores a hole through his leg is not Indra but a demon called Daṃśa, who had tried to carry off Bhṛgu's wife. If this wife be Pulomā, then her ravisher's name was given as Puloman in adhy. 4 of the Adi, where, however, there is no mention of Bhṛgu's curse; but we are told on the other hand that the ravisher of Pulomā was reduced to ashes by Bhṛgu's son Cyavana. But perhaps this demon Daṃśa is some other ravisher of Bhṛgu's wife.

In any event the happy result of this discourse of the sage was that Yudhiṣṭhira, casting off grief, enters the capital in state, is installed on the throne and performs the obsequial ceremonies of his departed kinsmen. Later Kṛṣṇa in an ecstatic trance communes with the distant Bhīṣma, who remains lying on the battlefield on a bed of arrows and who in a long hymn of adoration invokes Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa then sets out with the Pāṇḍava brothers and his followers to visit Bhīṣma on his death-bed. The arrival of the party at the battle-field, which it will be remembered has been identified by the redactors of the epic with the Bhārgava *tīrtha* Samantapañcaka, affords an easy opportunity for another repetition of the legend of Rāma's heroic exploit. That was the very spot where the Bhārgava Rāma had established those five lakes of blood. Śrī-Kṛṣṇa in passing points to those lakes and says (B. 12. 48. 9):

> *triḥsaptakṛtvo vasudhāṃ kṛtvā niḥkṣatriyāṃ prabhuḥ* |  
> *ihedānīṃ* tato *Rāmaḥ* karmaṇo virarāma *ha* || (VI)

Yudhiṣṭhira, the "dummy" of the rhapsode, has an insatiable longing to hear all about the extermination of the Kṣatriyas by the Bhārgava Rāma, though he had heard it all before from other story-tellers, and he has besides some doubts which he forthwith refers to Kṛṣṇa (B. 12. 48. 10):

> *triḥsaptakṛtvaḥ pṛthivī kṛtā niḥkṣatriyā purā* |  
> *Rāmeṇeti tathāttha tvaṃ atra me saṃśayo mahān* || (VII)

To solve this doubt of Yudhiṣṭhira Kṛṣṇa gratuitously volunteers to repeat the whole story of Rāma from the very beginning, a full-size account of the birth of the Bhārgava Rāma, of the extirpation of the Kṣatriyas and of the subsequent regeneration of the race. Here we have now an attestation of the entire story by Śrī-Kṛṣṇa, a variant of the story told by Akṛtavraṇa, a disciple of Rāma, to Yudhiṣṭhira himself in the Āraṇyaka. There are naturally several discrepancies between the two versions, two of which are noteworthy. In the first version it was Satyavatī's father-in-law who prepares the magical *carus*, which were subsequently exchanged by the good ladies who were to partake of them; here it is Satyavatī's husband himself, Ṛcīka, who prepares them. The other is a somewhat more serious discrepancy. In the Āraṇyaka version, Jamadagni was robbed of his calf by Arjuna Kārtavīrya himself, who is represented there as a perfect fiend. In the story as told by Śrī-Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna is a perfect angel of a man, always devoted to peace, ever obedient to Brahmins and ready to protect all classes; he had given away the earth to Brahmins in a horse sacrifice which he had performed. His sons on the other hand were "proud and cruel", and it was they who brought away the calf of Jamadagni's sacrificial cow. As [[P314]] it is difficult, at this distance of time, in the absence of independent evidence, to say whether Akṛtavraṇa or Śrī-Kṛṣṇa was more truthful, it must remain a moot point whether the guilty party is Arjuna Kārtavīrya or his sons. Then Śrī-Kṛṣṇa goes on to tell Yudhiṣṭhira that the Kṣatriyas were annihilated by the Bhārgava Rāma thrice seven times, speaking exactly like a Bhārgava (B. 12. 49. 64):

> *triḥsaptakṛtvaḥ pṛthivīṃ kṛtvā niḥkṣatriyāṃ prabhuḥ* |  
> *dakṣiṇāṃ aśvamedhānte Kaśyapāyādadat tataḥ* || (VIII)

The matter being now attested by Śrī-Kṛṣṇa himself, it cannot be described by revilers of Brahmins as a fabrication made by the Brahmins themselves.

It must always have been something of a puzzle to all thoughtful persons where Kṣatriyas like the Kauravas and the Pāṇḍavas and even Śrī-Kṛṣṇa himself came from after the Kṣatriya race had been wiped out thrice seven times by the Bhārgava Rāma, and that was in fact Yudhiṣṭhira's doubt, which he had expressed to Śrī-Kṛṣṇa. Various explanations of the mystery have been propounded. In the earlier chapters of the epic, as we have seen several times, it was the pious Brahmins who procreated children on the widows of the Kṣatriyas slain by Rāma and they became Kṣatriyas by the Vedic rule *pāṇigrahasya tanayaḥ* (1. 98. 5): the child belongs to him who has gone through the form of marriage with the mother. That was however not the view of Śrī-Kṛṣṇa. His explanation was that the Earth had concealed some Kṣatriyas. She had concealed some Haihayas among women, some Pauravas among the bears of Mount Ṛkṣavant. Some other Kṣatriyas were brought up in the forest among the kine, some in the cowpens among the calves.[^314_1] Some were protected by the Ocean, some by the wolves[^314_2] on Mount Gṛdhrakūṭa. These had all escaped destruction at the hands of the formidable Bhārgava. And the old Kṣatriya dynasties were resuscitated by Kaśyapa, who first ordered Rāma to clear out from the earth which he had given to Kaśyapa as a part of the sacrificial fee and restored by and by those scions of the old Kṣatriya families to their rightful heritage. Śrī-Kṛṣṇa evidently did not know anything about the procreation of Kṣatriyas by pious Brahmins on the widows of the Kṣatriyas slaughtered by the bloodthirsty Bhārgava. He con-[[P315]]sarily presuppose the Bhārgava Rāma to be an *avatāra* of Viṣṇu.

At the beginning of the third great sub-division of the Śānti, the Mokṣadharma, we have a lengthy discourse attributed to Bhṛgu, called the Bhṛgu-Bharadvāja-saṃvāda (adhy. 182-192 of the Vulgate), which summarizes in the form of questions and answers almost the entire Brahmanic teaching on the subject of (1) the elements, (2) life and death, (3) caste distinctions, (4) good and evil, (5) the four stages of life, and finally, (6) the other world. It will be seen that it is a complete tractate on Hindu Ontology, Sociology, Eschatology and Ethics that is here attributed to Bhṛgu, the eponymous ancestor of the Bhārgavas.

The oft-cited stanza B. 12, 339. 103 f.:

> *Haṃsaḥ Kūrmaś ca Matsyaś ca prādurbhāvād dvijottama* |  
> *Varāho Narasiṃhaś ca Vāmano Rāma eva ca* |  
> *Rāmo Daśarathiś caiva Sātvataḥ Kalkir eva ca* |

from the Mokṣadharma is important as containing one of the two actual references in our Mahābhārata to the Bhārgava Rāma as an *avatāra* of Viṣṇu, one of his ten *avatāras*; but the passage is suspect, as it is missing in some Grantha MSS. and some old Devanagari MSS. which have been collated by the Bhandarkar Oriental Research Institute for a critical edition of that book. The other reference is in the same chapter, a few stanzas earlier (B. 12. 339. 84):

> *Tretāyuge bhaviṣyāmi Rāmo Bhṛgukulodvahaḥ* |  
> *Kṣatraṃ cotsādayiṣyāmi samṛddhabalavāhanam* ||

This stanza cannot be impugned on the score of documentary evidence, which is unanimous in its favour. But both references occur in the Nārāyaṇīya section of the Mokṣadharma, which is notoriously a late addition to our Mahābhārata. This shows that the theory of *avatāras* is still developing in the epic and their number is not yet fixed, nor are the *avatāras* fully canonized. It should thus seem that the Mahābhārata does not [[P315]] necessarily presuppose the Bhārgava Rāma to be an *avatāra* of Viṣṇu.

## ANUŚĀSANAPARVAN

The Anuśāsana, for some reason that is not yet quite clear, is the richest in Bhārgava material.

Early in the beginning of this book (adhy. 4), we have the *third* repetition of the legend of the birth of Jamadagni. The previous chapter (3) relates the mighty deeds of the Kṣatriya Viśvāmitra, which led to his attaining the coveted status of a Brahmin. In adhy. 4, Bhīṣma explains how it came about that Viśvāmitra who was of mingled Brahmin and Kṣatriya parentage was born in the Kṣatriya caste with Brahmanic qualities, while his nephew Jamadagni, under similar conditions, was born in the Brahmin caste with Kṣatriyan qualities. We have here a repetition of the old story how Ṛcīka married Gādhi's daughter Satyavatī, who obtained some boons for herself and her mother. The mother and the daughter exchange the trees they had to embrace and *carus* of which they had to partake. The wise Ṛcīka had purposely made the prescriptions differently. He had in fact put the entire accumulated energy of Brahmanism in the *caru* of his wife, while he had put the entire accumulated energy of Kṣatriyahood in the *caru* intended for her mother. The consequence of the exchange slyly effected by the mother was that the son of Gādhi's wife turned out to be a man with Brahmanic propensities, while the son of Ṛcīka's wife would have been a model Kṣatriya; but, owing to the pleadings of Satyavatī, the great sage graciously gives his consent to the postponement of the doom to Satyavatī's grand-son.

This story we have had at Āraṇyaka 115 and Śānti 49 of the Vulgate. In passing it may be mentioned that the present version agrees with the Śāntiparvan version in making Ṛcīka the giver of the boons, whereas in the Āraṇyaka version this person is some ancestor of Ṛcīka, either Ṛcīka's father or perhaps Bhṛgu himself.

The mere mention of Bhārgava Rāma in B. 13. 14. 273 at once calls forth the reaction: [[P316]]

> *triḥsaptakṛtvaḥ pṛthivī yena niḥkṣatriyā kṛtā* |  
> *Jāmadagnyena Govinda Rāmeṇākliṣṭakarmaṇā* || etc. (IX)

[[P316]]
In adhy. 30 (of the Vulgate) we are told how a Kṣatriya Vītahavya was made a Brahmin by the mere word of a Bhṛgu. The story is as follows.

Vatsa, a descendant of Śaryāti had two sons, Haihaya and Tālajaṅgha. The hundred sons of Haihaya attacked and killed Haryaśva, king of Kāśī, whose son Sudeva succeeded him on the throne. Sudeva was likewise defeated and killed by the Haihayas. Sudeva was succeeded by Divodāsa, who built Vārāṇasī, on the northern bank of Ganges and the southern bank of the Gomatī. Likewise defeated by the Haihayas, he fled to his priest Bharadvāja, who obtained for him, through sacrifice, a son Pratardana. The son of Divodāsa defeated in turn all the Haihayas, when Vītahavya pursued by Pratardana, fled to the hermitage of Bhṛgu. When Pratardana demanded from Bhṛgu the surrender of Vītahavya, who was hiding in Bhṛgu's hermitage, Bhṛgu in order to save the life of Vītahavya said that there were only Brahmins in the hermitage. Through that declaration of Bhṛgu, who could not tell a lie, Vītahavya actually became a Brahmin. His descendants are set out for fifteen generations. His son was Gṛtsamada, whose eleventh descendant was Pramati; his son was Ruru; his son was Śunaka, from whom came the Śaunakas.

In adhy. 40, Bhīṣma expatiates on the fascination and frailty of women, the root of all evil, and to support his statement he relates the story of Vipula, another Bhārgava, an interesting story in which mesmerism or hypnotism plays some part (Vipulopākhyāna, adhy. 40-43 in the Vulgate).

The sage Devaśarman, the story goes, had a beautiful wife Ruci (Beauty) by name, who had attracted the attention of the gay king of the gods, Indra. Once upon a time it so happened that Devaśarman had to go away from his hermitage on some sacrificial business. Not feeling quite sure about his little Ruci, the old sage taking into his confidence his disciple, the Bhārgava Vipula, told him to protect his slender-waisted wife, especially against the amorous advances of Indra, who was an adept at assuming different forms.

Devaśarman pathetically enjoined his disciple to take every care and see that the lascivious king of the celestials did not defile that frivolous wife of his, like a wretched dog licking the *havis* placed near the sacrificial altar. To protect the virtue of Ruci, who was peerless on earth in beauty, Vipula decided to enter into her by his yogic power and live in her without her being conscious of it, until the critical moment was passed. Indra comes as expected and makes overtures to the beautiful Ruci, who had captivated his mind. Ruci, though anxious to reciprocate, remains externally indifferent to the blandishments of Indra, through the influence of Vipula, who was living within her and guiding her actions. Indra, puzzled by the behaviour of Ruci, reflects and realizes how matters stand. At that moment Vipula leaves the body of Ruci and re-enters his own body. Then Vipula faces the [[P317]] philanderer and soundly rebukes him, and Indra slinks away abashed. Only *one* man had been able to protect a woman and that was the Bhārgava Vipula (B. 13. 43. 27):

> *tenaikaṇa tu rakṣā vai Vipulena kṛtā striyāḥ* |  
> *nānyaḥ śaktas triloke 'smin rakṣituṃ nṛpa yoṣitam* ||

This story was told by the Bhārgava Mārkaṇḍeya to Bhīṣma (B. 13. 43. 18) and repeated by the latter to Yudhiṣṭhira.

A few chapters later we have again a Bhārgava story, the Cyavanopākhyāna in seven chapters (50-56), which is divided into two parts: the first two chapters (50-51) illustrate the sanctity of cows, the last five deal really with that topic of perennial interest, the mingled Brahmin and Kṣatriya parentage of the Bhārgava Rāma.

The first story, in which a cow was found to be the only equivalent possible for the ransom of the sage Cyavana, may be passed over.

In the second story (adhy. 52-56), we come back to the anecdote of Rāma Jāmadagnya, and we have here practically a repetition of the explanation given above (in adhy. 4 of this very *parvan*) of the circumstances under which Viśvāmitra, who was of mixed Brahmin and Kṣatriya parentage was born in the Kṣatriya caste with Brahmanic qualities, while Rāma under similar conditions was born in the Brahmin caste with the opposite qualities. The repetition comes about in this way. Yudhiṣṭhira, whose curiosity about the Bhārgava Rāma is, as already remarked, never satisfied, says to Bhīṣma (B. 13. 52. 1 ff.): "I have a great curiosity, O Lord, about Jamadagni's son Rāma, that foremost of all righteous persons. You should satisfy that curiosity. How was Rāma born, that truly valorous hero? He belonged by birth to a family of Brahmin sages. How did he become a follower of Kṣatriyan practices? Relate to me in detail the circumstances of Rāma's birth. Also how did a man born in the family of the Kuśikas, who was a Kṣatriya, become a Brahmin? Great indeed was the power of the high-souled Rāma as also that of Viśvāmitra!"

The answer is given by Bhīṣma by relating the prophecy which had been made by Cyavana, an ancestor of the Bhārgava Rāma. Cyavana wants to prevent the harm that will come to his clan by Rāma's adopting the practices of the Kṣatriyas, a danger of which he has *prophetic* knowledge. He repairs to Kuśika, through whose descendant the harm was to happen, in order to vex him, and, if he finds a favourable opportunity to pronounce a malediction on Kuśika, damning him and his descendants to eternal perdition. When the sage presents himself before the king and says that he wants to observe a certain vow while living in the palace with the king, he is warmly welcomed with unfeigned joy, and also served with meticulous care and obsequiousness by the king and the queen. The sage has a meal and he then sleeps for twenty-one days, during which the king and the queen wait upon him without food or drink, gently massaging his legs. Suddenly the sage wakes up and goes out, followed with trepidation by the king and the queen, and as suddenly vanishes! The king looks in vain, and, returning in a dejected mood to the room set apart for the sage, finds him again, stretched as before on his luxurious bed! The sage practises many tricks of this type, calculated to try the patience of the unfortunate couple, and ultimately yokes them to a heavily laden war-chariot. During the drive through the city, the sage gives the royal couple vicious digs with a heavy iron goad, distributing all the while in charity the entire wealth of the king. Still the sage finds no change in their behaviour. So in the end he has to [[P318]] himself as satisfied with their treatment of him and he goes back to the forest, asking the royal couple to come there on the following day. The king and queen take a little rest for the first time after forty-two days of trial and spend the night happily in each other's company. The next morning the king and the queen go to the forest to pay their respects to the sage and see there a magnificent palace standing in a big park, a fair imitation of Indra's paradise. After a short while, the magical palace and the park vanish, and there sits in the solitude of the forest the sage who had yoked them to the chariot and ill-treated them in other ways. Then the king feels that Brahmic power was the *summum bonum* of life. When he approaches Cyavana, the sage gives him a boon. Kuśika wants to know why Cyavana had come to live with him and what all those incidents implied. Cyavana tells him frankly what his intention was and also prophesies that Kuśika's wish would be fulfilled in so far that a descendant of Kuśika's (Viśvāmitra) would become a Brahmin. *Through the lustre* of the Bhṛgus, Kuśika's grandson (Viśvāmitra) would be an ascetic endowed with the splendour of fire (B. 13. 55. 32):

> *Bhṛgūṇām eva tejasā* |  
> *pautras te bhavitā vipro tapasvī pāvakadyutiḥ* ||

Then follows in the final chapter Cyavana's prophecy about the persecution of the Bhṛgus, about Ūrva (or Aurva), about Ṛcīka, and Jamadagni, who will marry Gādhi's daughter, that is, Kuśika's grand-daughter. Of the boons that will be given to the two ladies by Bhṛgu, the exchange of the trees and the *carus* by the mother and the daughter, about Viśvāmitra, and so on and so forth. Incidentally it may be mentioned that this is the *fourth* occurrence of this interesting story of the birth of the Bhārgava Rāma, it having occurred already at adhy. 4 of this very parvan, and before that in the Śānti (adhy. 48) and the Āraṇyaka (adhy. 115-117).

Some chapters later we again meet with the Bhārgava Rāma when Bhīṣma tells Yudhiṣṭhira about the merit of the gift of gold. The shades of his ancestors had appeared to Bhīṣma and told him that the gift of gold purifies the giver. Now it happens that the same advice had been given to the Bhārgava Rāma by Vasiṣṭha and other sages. In this connection we have again an [[P319]] to the extirpation of the Kṣatriyas and the conquest of the earth by Rāma (B. 13. 84. 31):

> *triḥsaptakṛtvaḥ pṛthivī kṛtā niḥkṣatriyā purā* |  
> *tato jitvā mahīṃ kṛtsnāṃ Rāmo rājīvalocanaḥ* || etc. (X)

The next chapter (85), a long rambling chapter with 168 stanzas, deals with the mystery, already alluded to above, of the birth of Bhṛgu, Aṅgiras and Kavi. They are said to be *prajāpatis* and progenitors of many tribes and clans, in fact of the entire mankind.

It will be a surprise to many that our sandals and umbrellas we also owe to a Bhṛgu. Chapter 95 relates how the practice arose of giving umbrellas and sandals to Brahmins at *śrāddhas* and other religious rites. Once upon a time Jamadagni was amusing himself by shooting arrows at a distant target, and his wife Reṇukā was fetching the arrows shot by him. Sorely afflicted by the scorching heat of the midday sun, she rested just for a moment under the shade of an umbrageous tree. Being kept waiting, the irascible Bhṛgu scolded his wife for her tardiness, but on learning the real cause of the delay, wanted to shoot down the offending sun from his high position in the heavens. The frightened luminary comes to him in the guise of a poor Brahmin, who tries to dissuade him from carrying out his terrible threat, but is recognized by the Bhṛgu and reprimanded. In the end Jamadagni is pacified and receives from the sun the first umbrella and the first pair of leather sandals. To make a gift of them to Brahmins is highly meritorious. This account of the origin of shoes and sandals is, I believe, not found outside the Mahābhārata. [[P320]] In adhy. 98 (of the Vulgate) we have a report by Bhīṣma of a discussion between the Bhārgava Śukra and Bali about flowers, lamps, aromatics, appropriate to be offered to gods on diverse occasions and the merit accruing from the presentation.

Above, while discussing the Droṇaparvan version of the Ṣoḍaśarājakīya, I had referred to palpable evidence of the "bhṛguization" of a legend. We have another illuminating instance of the process in the next story (adhy. 99-100 of the Vulgate) told by Bhīṣma to Yudhiṣṭhira. It is another version of the well-known legend of Nahuṣa's fall from heaven.

Nahuṣa, when king of the gods, neglected the daily offerings to the gods including the *bali*, losing thereby some of his spiritual power. Subsequently, having oppressed the sages, he was hurled down from heaven and turned into a boa by the curse of a Brahmin sage, Bhṛgu.

A similar version of this legend occurs in the Udyoga (adhy. 11-17) and is again alluded to in the Śānti (adhy. 342). There it is related that Nahuṣa became extremely arrogant and caused the sages to carry his palanquin. While being carried about in this way, his foot touched the head of Agastya, who by his curse turned him into a boa. The defect in the construction of this naïve story is very obvious and must have been early noticed by the diaskeuasts themselves. Nahuṣa, by the terms of the boon which [[P321]] Brahmā had given him, could absorb the power of any being on whom he set his eyes. Under these circumstances, even the resourceful Agastya could not effectively curse Nahuṣa, because Agastya, when kicked by the tyrant, being in view of the other, was *ipso facto* deprived of all his spiritual power, like all the gods and sages who had been oppressed by Nahuṣa and were utterly powerless before him.

The revised version of the legend in the Anuśāsana stages beforehand a confabulation between Bhṛgu and Agastya. Agastya wants to damn Nahuṣa but does not know how to. Bhṛgu befriends him and gives him the assurance that he (Bhṛgu) would somehow bring about the downfall of the tyrant. Bhṛgu, who knows beforehand, by spiritual prevision, that Nahuṣa was going to kick Agastya, proposes to Agastya, in anticipation of it, that on a certain day he would sit *hidden* inside the matted locks of the sage and from that position he would curse Nahuṣa. So when the opportune moment came, Bhṛgu, possessed of great lustre, addressed Agastya as follows: "Do you shut your eyes, Agastya, while I enter into the matted hair of your head". Having said this, Bhṛgu of unfading glory and great energy entered into the locks of Agastya, who stood still like a wooden post. Soon after, Nahuṣa saw Agastya approached for being yoked to his chariot. Bhṛgu, who was sitting in the matted locks of Agastya, took care not to look at Nahuṣa. Fully acquainted with the power which the illustrious Nahuṣa had acquired on account of the boon which Brahmā had given him, Bhṛgu had acted thus. Agastya though thus treated by Nahuṣa did not yield to anger. Then Nahuṣa urged Agastya with his goad. The pious sage Agastya still did not yield to anger. The lord of celestials, himself enraged at this pusillanimity, then struck Agastya on the head with his left foot. When the sage was thus struck on the head, then Bhṛgu, who was sitting within the matted locks of Agastya, became incensed and cursed the sinful Nahuṣa saying, "Thou hast kicked the head of the great sage, fall down therefore on the earth, changed into a boa!" Thus imprecated by Bhṛgu, *who had not been seen*, Nahuṣa forthwith became transformed into a boa and in that form dropped down on the earth.

Yudhiṣṭhira, who had heard a different version of the story from Śalya, as narrated in the Udyoga, maintains naturally a discreet silence about these discrepancies and proceeds to question Bhīṣma about some other matters on which he wanted information.

Next, in the course of a long passage devoted to the praise of Brahmins, showing that the Brahmins are mightier than even the gods, the story of Cyavana is repeated (adhy. 156).

Cyavana, who had been rejuvenated and cured of blindness by the Aśvins, had, as we have seen, promised them that they should drink Soma with Indra and the other gods. The gods were wavering in their mind, but Indra was adamant. He refused to accept the Soma libation in Cyavana's sacrifice, [[P322]] if those low-caste Aśvins were invited at the same time. When Cyavana was going to put his magic in operation, Indra rushes on him with a mountain and thunderbolt, but is instantly paralyzed by Cyavana and brought to submission. [[P322]] Then Cyavana creates a fearsome monster, Mada, who is about to gobble up all the gods. Beseeched by the gods, who were frightened to death by this terrible apparition, Indra apologizes to Cyavana; and the Aśvins, patronized by the great wizard, are allowed to share the Soma libation with the other gods. This story was already narrated to Yudhiṣṭhira by the sage Lomaśa in the Āraṇyaka (adhy. 123 of the Vulgate).

## AŚVAMEDHAPARVAN

An echo of the above story we find early in the course of the Aśvamedhaparvan. In adhy. 9 we find Agni taunting Indra about the humiliation of the latter at the hands of Cyavana, which has been just described (B. 14. 9. 31):

> *yatra Śaryātiṃ Cyavaṇo yajayiṣyan*  
> *sahāśvibhyāṃ somam agṛhṇād ekaḥ* |  
> *taṃ tvaṃ kruddhaḥ pratyaṣedhiḥ purastāc*  
> *Charyātijajñaṃ smara taṃ Mahendra* ||

Agni might have added the story of his own humiliation at the hands of another wizard of the same clan, Bhṛgu, when he was indiscreet enough to divulge some secret to Puloman, the seducer of Bhṛgu's wife Pulomā, but for obvious reasons he does not do so.

In another digression, the Anugītāparvan, we have an allusion to the annihilation of Kṣatriyas by the Bhārgava Rāma, used this time for a different purpose (adhy. 29-30 of the Vulgate). It is here made the basis of a homily on the vanity of life. After the murder of Arjuna Kārtavīrya and the extermination of the Kṣatriyas, the Bhārgava Rāma was taught by the shades of his ancestors that greater than any victory over kings was the conquest of one's own self: the ascetic ideal. This conquest is made by self-mortification. Thus admonished by his departed ancestors, the Bhārgava Rāma practised the most austere penances, and as a consequence of this exercise of self-control, that highly blessed one acquired that supreme felicity which it is so difficult to obtain.

The last Bhārgava story of the Mahābhārata is the Uttaṅkopākhyāna of this *parvan* (adhy. 53-58 of the Vulgate), which we shall next consider.

After the death of Bhīṣma, Kṛṣṇa returns to Dvārakā. On his way he meets in a desert the sage Uttaṅka, who is ready to pronounce a malediction on Kṛṣṇa when he learns that the latter had not brought about peace between the contending Kauravas and Pāṇḍavas. Śrī-Kṛṣṇa pacifies Uttaṅka by enlightening him about his divine nature and divine mission, complaining that the Kurus, intoxicated as they were by the pride of pomp and power, had not listened to the wholesome advice he had given [58] them [[P323]] for their welfare. At Uttaṅka's request, Śrī-Kṛṣṇa shows him his cosmic form (*rūpaṃ aiśvaraṃ*), made popular by the Gītā, giving him rare boons.

This story impels the intelligent Janamejaya to ask Vaiśampāyana what penances the great Uttaṅka had practised so that he had the temerity to threaten even Viṣṇu (Śrī-Kṛṣṇa). Vaiśampāyana replies that it was his supreme devotion to his *guru* that had endowed him with this great spiritual power, and he proceeds to relate the story of Uttaṅka. He relates how Uttaṅka had escaped being eaten by the cannibal king Saudāsa and obtained the ear-jewels of Saudāsa's queen Madayantī as fee for his *guru* Gautama, how on the way the ear-jewels were stolen by a snake (*nāga*), and how Uttaṅka recovered them from the subterranean world of the Nāgas.

It will be noticed that this Uttaṅkopākhyāna is but a variant (metrical) version of Pauṣyaparvan, a (prose) sub-section of the Adi (adhy. 3), but with some significant differences in the details. The *dramatis personæ* are in part different. The preceptor is not Veda, as in the Adi, but Gotama, the husband of Ahalyā; likewise the king from whom Uttaṅka gets the ear-jewels is here not Pauṣya but Saudāsa (Kalmāṣapāda), who had become a cannibal by the curse of some great sage, whom the arrogant king had belaboured with a hunter. Moreover, in the first version, the name of the snake is given as Takṣaka, the snake which had bitten king Parīkṣit and been the cause of his premature death; in the second he remains nameless. The only reason for citing the story of Uttaṅka here, in this paper, is that in the Aśvamedha version of the story Uttaṅka is several times called a Bhārgava, a fact which does not appear from the Ādiparvan version. We have thus here a documentation for a Bhārgava, who by the power of his austerities—devotion to one's *guru* is a kind of *tapas*—was in a position to curse an *avatāra* of Viṣṇu himself for his apparent fault in not conciliating the Pāṇḍavas and the Kauravas and preventing the fratricidal war, and who had to be gently pacified by the great god by showing him his cosmic form to support his assertions.

If we now go back to the Adi, we shall find that this figure of Uttaṅka has been further deftly woven into the fabric of [[P324]] and not allow-ed to remain merely as a loose appendage. For, in the short *metrical* tail of the (prose) Pauṣyaparvan, it is narrated that, after his adventure in the world of the Nāgas Uttaṅka betakes himself straight to the Pāṇḍava Janamejaya in Hastināpura and prevails upon the king to punish Takṣaka for causing the death of Parīkṣit. At Uttaṅka's instance Janamejaya instituted the snake sacrifice; and at this sacrifice Vaiśampāyana first recited the Mahābhārata. Our debt to this Bhārgava is therefore very obvious.

This Uttaṅkopākhyāna contains the last important reference in the Mahābhārata to the Bhārgavas, linking up with that in adhy. 3 of the Adi.

There are still a few more Bhārgava stories in the Mahābhārata, the consideration of which I had intentionally postponed and to which we shall now turn.

We run into a nest of Bhārgava legends, as a matter of fact, already in the fourth sub-section of the Adi, the Paulomaparvan, which have not been discussed above.

The Mahābhārata, as is well known, has two variant openings. In the first (Adi. 1), when the Sūta (or, according to some editions, Sauti) Ugraśravas, who is to recite the Mahābhārata, presents himself at the hermitage of Kulapati Śaunaka, during the twelve-year sacrificial session inaugurated by the sage in the sacred Naimiṣa Forest and offers to recite stories for the edification and entertainment of the guests, the sages assembled there express their desire to hear the celebrated Mahābhārata (1. 1. 18 f.):

> *Janamejayasya yāṃ rājño Vaiśampāyana uktavān* |  
> *yathāvat sa rṣis tuṣṭyā satre Dvaipāyanājñayā* ||  
> *vedaiś caturbhiḥ samitāṃ Vyāsasyādbhutakarmaṇaḥ* |  
> *saṃhitāṃ śrotum icchāmo dharmyāṃ pāpabhayāpahāṃ* ||

The Sūta accordingly commences with some *maṅgala* stanzas (1. 1. 20):

> *ādyaṃ puruṣaṃ īśānaṃ puruhūtaṃ puruṣṭutam* |  
> *ṛtaṃ ekākṣaraṃ brahma vyaktāvyaktaṃ sanātanam* || etc.,

which are followed by a sort of prologue, which latter languishes and breaks off somewhere.

In adhy. 4 of the Adi, we come upon another opening, which totally ignores the first! The Sūta is re-introduced. The scene is the same, but the programme is changed. Here the assembled sages do not themselves order the entertainment, but ask the Sūta to wait until the Kulapati Śaunaka comes. When in the next chapter (5), the Kulapati joins the company, after having duly performed his round of daily duties, he instead of asking the Sūta to narrate the Mahābhārata, as the sages in the first instance had done, tells him, strange to say, to relate first the history of the *Bhārgavas* (1. 5. 3).

> *tatra vaṃśam ahaṃ pūrvaṃ śrotum icchāmi Bhārgavam* |  
> *kathayasva katham etāṃ kalyaḥ sma śravaṇe tava* ||

The Sūta obediently proceeds to relate the history of that "most illustrious family of the Bhṛgus, which is honoured even by the celestials with Indra, Agni and the Maruts" (1. 5. 5). Here the Bhārgava interest is very clear and unmistakable. Accordingly eight chapters (5-12), which form the Paulomaparvan, are *entirely* consecrated to an account of the wonderful deeds of some of the Bhārgavas, an account which is not even remotely connected in actual fact with the incidents or characters of our epic. It is a digression pure and simple, introduced with the very obvious object of glorifying the Bhārgavas and giving a permanent form to some of the Bhārgava [[P325]] myths and legends. These chapters are a short history of one special branch of the Bhārgava clan, represented by: Bhṛgu, Cyavana, Pramati, Ruru and Śunaka. The significance of this branch and its connection with our version of the Mahābhārata will become apparent presently.

Bhṛgu, a sage of almost mythical character, the eponymous ancestor of the family, is here said to have been created by Brahmā from the sacrificial fire during Varuṇa's sacrifice (216\*):

> *Bhṛgur maharṣir bhagavān Brahmaṇā vai svayambhuvā* |  
> *Varuṇasya kratau jātaḥ pāvakād iti naḥ śrutam* ||

This interpolated stanza (found only in N) contradicts the statement in the main body of the text (documented jointly by N and S) to the effect that Bhṛgu was born by piercing the heart of Brahmā (1. 60. 40):

> *Brahmaṇo hṛdayaṃ bhittvā niḥsṛto bhagavān Bhṛguḥ* |

While Bhṛgu's wife Pulomā was pregnant, the story continues (adhy. 5-6), there came to Bhṛgu's hermitage, during his absence, a demon (*rākṣasa*), Puloman, who became enamoured of her and wanted to carry her off. To make sure of his facts, however, the demon asked Agni whether she was really Bhṛgu's wife. The fact was that this Pulomā was first betrothed to Puloman and afterwards given by her father to Bhṛgu, and Puloman wanted to have his Pulomā back. On getting from Agni an answer in the affirmative, the demon, assuming the form of a boar, carried her off. On the way Cyavana is born. His lustre instantly reduces to ashes the demonic ravisher of his mother and saves her from a very awkward predicament. Pulomā returns home safely with the baby. Bhṛgu only learns of this incident after his return to the hermitage. Incensed at the outrage, he curses the god Agni, whom he regards as the prime cause of the disaster, saying that Agni would be an eater of all things, good and bad (*sarva-bhakṣa*).

There follows in adhy. 8 the story of Ruru, son of Pramati. Menakā, an apsaras, abandons her beautiful daughter near the hermitage of the sage Sthūlakeśa. She is called Pramadvarā. Pramati arranges her marriage with his son Ruru, who has fallen in love with her. Shortly before the celebration of their marriage Pramadvarā is bitten by a venomous snake and dies, leaving Ruru disconsolate. By the miraculous powers of his austere penance, this Bhārgava gives up half of his life to Pramadvarā and revives her, and ultimately marries her. Ruru takes a vow to destroy all the snakes in the world, like Janamejaya before him, whose father Parīkṣit had died as the result of a snake-bite. One day Ruru comes across a harmless old snake of the variety known as *dundubha* (adhy. 9). The snake begs to be spared and so Ruru does not kill it. The [[P326]] dundubha body only concealed the metamorphosed soul of a sage, who was suffering the effects of a curse pronounced on him in a previous birth (adhy. 10). The sage [[P326]] declares *ahiṃsā* to be the highest duty of a Brahmin. Janamejaya had once tried to destroy the race of snakes by performing a snake sacrifice; they were saved by the Brahmin Āstīka (adhy. 11). Ruru subsequently hears the story of Janamejaya's snake sacrifice from his father Pramati (adhy. 12). This story of the snake sacrifice as told by Pramati to his son Ruru was repeated verbatim by the Sūta to Śaunaka and forms in our version of the Mahābhārata the Āstīkaparvan, the fifth sub-section of the Adi. (adhy. 13-53).

It will be noticed that from adhy. 4 to adhy. 12 of the Adi. a section which, as already mentioned, is entirely concerned with the history of a branch of the Bhārgava clan, there is no mention of the Mahābhārata at all. Nor is there, as a matter of fact, any mention of the epic in the immediate sequel up to adhy. 53 of the Adi! Only in adhy. 53, after having heard first the Bhārgava legends and then the story of the snake sacrifice (which had been previously related by the Bhārgava Pramati to his son Ruru), Śaunaka at last expresses the desire to hear the Mahābhārata of Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana, which was narrated to king Janamejaya by Vaiśampāyana in the intervals of that snake sacrifice (1. 53, 32 f.) :

> *Mahābhārataṃ ākhyānaṃ Pāṇḍavānāṃ yaśaskaram* |  
> *Janamejayena yat pṛṣṭaḥ Kṛṣṇa-Dvaipāyanas tadā* ||  
> *śrāvayāmāsa vidhivat tadā karmāntareṣu saḥ* |  
> *tām ahaṃ vidhivat puṇyaṃ śrotum icchāmi vai kathām* ||

This completes our survey of the Bhārgava material in the Mahābhārata.[^326_1] But even this analysis does not give an adequate idea of the total number of Bhārgava references in the Great Epic. The Bhārgavas regularly occur as static figures, along with other ancient sages, in the descriptions of martial combats, festive gatherings, state functions, council meetings and all important assemblies. Outstanding incidents of their history are frequently alluded to, briefly, even in the course of other narratives. The names of their heroes are habitually introduced in similes and metaphors: they are the standards of comparison (*upamāna*), to which everybody else is compared, especially the epic heroes. Thus a man is praised by saying that his intelligence is like that of Śukra. A warrior is eulogized by saying that in heroism he was the equal of the Bhārgava Rāma. Bhīṣma is once praised by saying that he could not be defeated even by Rāma. In other places the valour and effulgence of Cyavana and Aurva are utilized for the sake of a passing comparison. The devotion of Sukanyā to her husband Cyavana has been made proverbial by constant citation. These details could not be considered in the present paper for want of space.

## RETROSPECT

From the legends preserved in our epic it should seem that the Bhārgavas were a Brahmin clan, perhaps more intimately associated with the ancient Kṣatriyas than most of the other Brahmin clans, being largely connected with them by matrimonial ties. Thus Cyavana is said to have married Sukanyā, the daughter of king Śaryāti. Ṛcīka had married Satyavatī, the daughter of king Gādhi of Kānyakubja and sister of the famous Viśvāmitra. Jamadagni's wife Reṇukā is likewise said to have been a princess by birth, being a daughter of king Prasenajit of Ayodhyā. The Bhārgavī Devayānī was moreover married to king Yayāti: one of the very few *pratiloma* marriages on-record in Brahmanical literature.[^326_2] King Vītahavya had been adopted and made a Brahmin by a Bhṛgu, and his descendants became Bhārgavas.[^326_3] On the other hand some of the ancient Bhārgavas seem to have come seri-[[P327]]ously into conflict with the Kṣatriyas. The relations of Rāma Jāmadagnya with the Kṣatriyas are so well known and have been repeated above so often that it is unnecessary to dilate upon them here. But even in the case of Aurva and Jamadagni, the epic has to relate conflicts with the Kṣatriyas, which have been alluded to above.

In these conflicts the Bhārgavas are represented in our epic as irascible sages, domineering, arrogant, unbending and revengeful. To our epic bards they are at the same time omniscient and omnipotent Supermen, who had become so chiefly by virtue of their rigid austerities and the magical or spiritual powers acquired by them. Owing to these occult powers, the Bhārgavas were like gods walking on earth, or rather greater than mere gods. Thus Bhṛgu pronounces a curse on Agni—a god fervently lauded and worshipped by the simple Aryans—for no faults of his. He also cursed (according to one version) Nahuṣa, who had been elected king of gods and who had become arrogant and irreligious owing to this sudden elevation to power. The wizard Cyavana paralyzed the arm of the recalcitrant Indra, a high god of the Vedic Aryans. Jamadagni would shoot down the Sun, another Aryan god. The Bhārgava Uttaṅka, when about to curse Śrī-Kṛṣṇa, the supreme god of the Bhāgavatas or Vaiṣṇavas, was gently pacified by the *avatāra*. The kings of the earth are of course like vermin before these Bhārgavas. The mighty Haihayas tremble before the infant Aurva, who blinds them by his effulgence, and they have to beg for mercy on their bended knees. King Kuśika grovels at the feet of Cyavana and meekly submits to all varieties of indignities for fear that the great sage might curse him.

Bhṛgu, the eponymous ancestor of the Bhārgavas, was one of the *prajāpatis*. While the other *prajāpatis* like Dakṣa are said to have issued from different limbs of Brahmā, Bhṛgu is represented as having sprung from Brahmā's heart, the noblest of the internal organs of man or god.[^327_1] In another context in our epic, it is implied that Bhṛgu was the greatest of the *maharṣis*, though his name is not included even in the list of the famous Seven Sages.

But the Bhārgava most popular with our bards is surely Rāma Jāmadagnya. The bards love to dwell on his martial exploits, repeating them whenever the slightest opportunity for it presents itself. The shadow of this colossus overspreads the entire epic, excepting the short tale at the end of the poem. In our epic he is not yet a full-fledged *avatāra,* but on the high way to be ele-[[P328]]vated to that rank, surreptitious efforts being made to make the epic document his divinity. He conquers the whole world, alone and unaided; such is the prowess of his fierce austerities. He frees the earth of the burden of Kṣatriyas thrice seven times and makes the gift of the earth to Kaśyapa, his priest, who divides it among Brahmins. Rāma fights even the enemies of the gods, with the same assurance and success, enemies whom the gods themselves could not subdue. As the Bhārgava Rāma is the perfect warrior (*sarvaśastrabhṛtāṃ varaḥ* a phrase the bards love to apply to him), three of the leading warriors of the Kaurava army—Bhīṣma, Droṇa and Karṇa—are said to have been initiated into the science of arms by Rāma Jāmadagnya, though the latter according to the epic itself, lived at the end of the Tretā Age and the Kuru Pāṇḍava war took place at the end of the Dvāpara.

The epic contains a number of episodes (*upākhyānas*) relating to the Bhārgavas, such as, the Aurvopākhyāna (Adi), Kārtavīryopākhyāna (Āraṇyaka), Ambopākhyāna (Udyoga), Vipulopākhyāna (Śānti), and Uttaṅkopākhyāna (Aśvamedha), and so on. The entire Pauloma and a large section of the Pauṣya two independent sub-parvans of the epic, are also devoted to the legends of the Bhārgavas. Besides these there are important discussions and discourses attributed to some of the celebrated Bhārgavas, such as the Bhṛgu-Bharadvāja-saṃvāda, the Cyavana-Kuśika-saṃvāda and the Mārkaṇḍeya-samāsyā.

Another striking feature of these Bhārgava legends in our Mahābhārata is the frequent repetition of these legends on different occasions in the course of the epic. Thus the legend of Uttaṅka, the myth of the altercation between Cyavana and Indra, the story of Droṇa's obtaining weapons from the Bhārgava Rāma, and the account of Karṇa's pupilship under him, is each told *twice*, in different contexts. The legend of the birth of Jamadagni and Rāma is related in all *four* times. That the Bhārgava Rāma exterminated the Kṣatriyas thrice seven times is mentioned *ten* times, in nearly identical form (*triḥsaptakṛtvaḥ pṛthivī kṛtā niḥkṣatriyā purā*, which appears to have been a slogan of the bards); but the humiliation of the pride of the Kṣatriyas by the Bhārgava Rāma is mentioned about a *score* of times.

It is to be noted that the Bhārgavas spring into this prominence all of a sudden in the Mahābhārata. We look in vain for any reflection of their phenomenal power and glory in the Vedic literature. There the Bhārgavas are frequently alluded to as devoted to the fire-cult and they appear in the rôle of a group of ancient fire priests.[^328_1] They are said to have procured fire for mankind. In the Battle of Ten Kings, the Bhārgavas are mentioned with the Druhyus. In many passages they are associated with the Aṅgirases. The Atharvaveda is also known as Bhṛgvaṅgiras, and it seems certain that both the Bhṛgus and the Aṅgirases dabbled a great deal in the black art and were feared on that account. That they probably came into conflict with other clans and especially perhaps the Kṣatriyas is indicated by the fact that in the last-named Veda the name of Bhṛgu is chosen to exemplify the dangers incurred by those who oppress Brahmins. The Sṛñjaya Vaitahavyas succumb as the result of an attack on Bhṛgu. The Aitareya Brāhmaṇa shows Bhṛgu in a similar light.

Thus we see that the Vedic references give no ground for explaining the eminence of the ancient Bhārgavas implied by the epic account. These references supply nevertheless rudimentary clues of ideas and sentiments which were probably magnified in the imagination of the remote descendants of a powerful ancient clan, influenced strongly by the cult of ancestor worship. Thus, for example, the close connection of the Bhṛgus with the fire cult may perhaps serve to explain the part that Agni plays in many of the Bhārgava legends in the Mahābhārata. The Cyavana-Aśvins legend of the epic finds some support in the statement of the Ṛgveda to the effect that the Aśvins rejuvenated Cyavana, making him "acceptable to his wife and a husband of maidens." The Brāhmaṇas amplify this account. The connection of the Bhṛgus with the Atharvaveda explains the element of witchcraft in the Bhārgava legends of our epic, such as, for example, the revival of the dead by the Bhārgava Śukra, or the paralyzing of the arm of Indra by Cyavana and of the creation of the monster called Mada, mentioned above. That the Bhṛgus had in some way championed the cause of Brahmins against other clans is, as [[P329]] [67] already mentioned, supported by a reference in the Atharvaveda. Their intimate association with the Aṅgirases implied in the Vedic literature is reflected faithfully in many of the stories and genealogies of our epic.

Taking a collective view of these Bhārgava references in the Great Epic, we cannot avoid the conclusion that the Bhārgava heroes occupy a surprisingly large portion of the canvas—which is said to depict the Bhārata War—filling up as they do much of the available space of the background. And it is more than probable that if the epic is examined yet more minutely, still further evidence of Bhārgava material, hitherto undiscovered, will be brought to light. Their myths and legends are uniformly distributed over the entire extent of the Great Epic with the exception of some short and unimportant *parvans* (10 and 15-18) at the end (comprising in all not more than 2500 stanzas, a negligible fraction of the epic), books on which the average reader of the poem bestows but scant attention. The figures of the Bhārgavas have also been magnified to colossal proportions, painted with a thick brush and in vivid colours. In short, the Bhārgavas are represented in our epic—the Mahābhārata, the epic of the Bhārata's or the epic of the Bhārata War—throughout as *the* people. How does that come about? "Cui *bono*?", as the Roman lawyer would have asked.

To imagine that all this fulsome eulogy liberally showered upon the heroes of the Bhārgavas, and the interminable repetition of their stories and legends are entirely unconscious—at least unintentional—and without any ulterior motive, being just ordinary features of epic treatment, would be indeed naïve.[^329_1] 


unfavourable evidence by a witness against one's own self ordinarily does; what the Bhṛgus in turn did to the Kṣatriyas—namely, the annihilating the Kṣatriyas by Bhārgava Rāma 3×7 is known to us only from the account of the event from Brahmin sources. This myth—the dream of the Bhṛgus—is the sublimation of that intolerable inferiority feeling which had been repressed, but which was clamouring for expression.[^330_1]

[^330_1]: There is only one explanation of the childish exaggeration and this repeated mention of the annihilation of the Kṣatriyas by the Bhārgava Rāma. A deep analysis of the motives underlying this (phenomenon) would suggest that these fabrications are only a form of "over-compensation", an endeavour to make the Bhṛgus feel important and "worth while", after the disastrous blow to their ego-ideals. It is the psychological revenge of the Bhṛgus who were all but exterminated by the Kṣatriyas. The slaughter of the Bhṛgus admitted by the Bhṛgus themselves in the Aurva legend deserves all the credence which unfavourable evidence by a witness against one's own self ordinarily does; what the Bhṛgus in turn did to the Kṣatriyas—namely, the annihilating the Kṣatriyas by Bhārgava Rāma 3×7 is known to us only from the account of the event from Brahmin sources. This myth—the dream of the Bhṛgus—is the sublimation of that intolerable inferiority feeling which had been repressed, but which was clamouring for expression.

<details><summary>विश्वास-टिप्पनी</summary>

Then how does one explain the defeat of parashurAma by bhIShma in the bhArgava redacted epic? And his defeat by rAma in the rAmAyaNa, vAlmIki being a bhArgava too?
</details>



In the first place, we have very clear and definite evidence of the fact that our epic has been consciously and deliberately expanded at least in one instance: the surreptitious addition of a bunch of Bhārgava legends to the Kuru-Pāṇḍava epic in the shape of the so-called Paulomaparvan in the Adi which is entirely made up of Bhārgava legends and has not even the remotest intrinsic connection with the story of the epic. Then we have equally clear and definite evidence of the tendentious "Bhṛguization" of older legends, which occur in the epic itself in two forms, one with and the other without some important Bhārgava element, to wit, the Stories of Sixteen Kings (Ṣoḍaśarājakīya) and the Nahuṣa-[[P331]]Agastya legend. We have also noticed that our Mahābhārata contains two variant openings, one of which is clearly inspired by a Bhārgava,[^330_2] both fortunately preserved by the conservative instinct of the redactors, helped by a process of conflation peculiar to the Mahābhārata, which tolerates a close juxtaposition of discrepant versions. We have further indirect testimony of the effort made to connect some Bhārgava or other with the propagation of the epic. We are thus told that it was the Bhārgava Uttaṅka who instigated Janamejaya to undertake the snake sacrifice at which the Mahābhārata was first publicly recited. Our Āstīka is that tale which was narrated to the Bhārgava Ruru by his father Pramati. And last but not least, we must take account of the very important fact that the Kulapati Śaunaka himself, before whom the Mahābhārata is said to have been recited by the Sūta Ugraśravas, was also a Bhārgava! So when Śaunaka says that he wants to hear the history of the Bhārgavas before anything else (1. 5. 3):

> *tatra vaṃśam ahaṃ pūrvaṃ śrotum icchāmi Bhārgavam* |,

the reason for this peculiar predilection of the host of the Sūta is very evident.

[^330_2]: This was noticed by HOLTZMANN, *Das Mahābhārata,* vol. 2 (1893), p. 12. "Es liegt hier die Einleitung des *Mahābhārata* der Bhargava vor, gerade wie im Gesetzbuche des *Manu* die Fassung der *Bhargava* sich eingedrangt hat". He did not follow, however, this fruitful idea any further, being misled by the immediate sequel. "Unser *Mahabharata,"* he remarks, "kehrt aber sofort wieder zur anderen Fassung zurück. In Folgenden erzählt nicht *Pramati* den *Ruru*, sondern, wie früher, Ugraśravas *dem Śaunaka"*.

But it might be contended that we are unnecessarily emphasizing the Bhārgava element; that the Mahābhārata was or has come to be an encyclopaedia of Brahmanic tradition and it therefore contains also all the Bhārgava legends in a slightly exaggerated form perhaps. The epic itself says (1. 56. 33):

> *yad ihāsti tad anyatra yan nehāsti na tat kvacit*

That is undoubtedly true, to a certain extent. One can, however, easily convince oneself that the diaskeuasts who boldly conceived the colossal idea of converting the popular Epic of the Bhāratas into the *Encyclopaedia Brahmanica,* though generally catholic in their selection of Brahmanic legends and doctrines, and eclectic as regards their religious and philosophical outlook, yet they [[P331]] were probably not entirely without their preferences and prejudices, and that they do not apportion anything like the same amount of space and breadth of treatment to the myths and legends of other Brahmanic families such as the Agastyas, Ātreyas, Kaṇvas, Kaśyapas, Gautamas, Vāsiṣṭhas, and so on. The legends of these other families or clans are by no means entirely ignored in our Mahābhārata, but they are comparatively few in number and hardly ever repeated. They appear like negligible details on the vast canvas of the epic and are easily lost sight of in this colossal accumulation of apparently most heterogeneous elements, which are all the same carefully balanced so as to produce a more or less homogeneous impression. Very differently treated are the Bhārgava legends in our Mahābhārata. To make any impression by the side of the titanic figures of the old epic like Bhīṣma and Karṇa, Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, the Bhārgavas had to be magnified a great deal and their legends, which were probably not so well known then as now, had to be repeated. And we accordingly find that the legends have been repeated, so often that the redactors themselves must have in time come to believe in them; and the figures have been magnified, so liberally that they appear almost to eclipse the heroes of the Great Epic itself.

Just for the sake of contrast, we might compare the other great epic of India, the Rāmāyaṇa, for Bhārgava references. That epic also is a Brahmanic epic, containing a host of Brahmanic legends and stories. The result of his quest for Bhārgava references will astonish the reader. The references are remarkably few and extremely meagre. About our Bhṛgu, a *vibhūti* of Śrī-Kṛṣṇa, the only thing recorded in the Rāmāyaṇa is that his wife was decapitated by Viṣṇu! Cyavana has been introduced in Vālmīki's epic only to narrate some stories. The solitary reference to our Rāma Jāmadagnya (*sarvaśastrabhṛtāṃ varaḥ*) has been noticed above; it is the one in which he challenges Rāma Dāśarathi and is worsted in the encounter! We learn nothing more about Jamadagni from the Rāmāyaṇa than the bald fact that he was slain by Arjuna Kārtavīrya. Aurva, who as an infant had blinded the Haihayas by his effulgence, is not mentioned at all, so far as I know. Comment is superfluous.

[[P332]]
[70] Now there can be no question that all this Bhārgava material in our present Mahābhārata is entirely foreign to the plan of the original saga of the Bhāratas, occurring as it does almost wholly in the episodic portion of the epic. There should be, therefore, in my opinion no hesitation in concluding that in our *version of the Mahābhārata there is a conscious—nay deliberate—weaving together or rather stitching together of the Bhārata legends with the Bhārgava myths*.

The question how precisely this Bhārgava element, which we find concentrated mostly in the *upākhyānas*, came into the cycle of the Bhārata legends is intriguing, but unfortunately the answer is largely a matter of speculation. Even according to the traditional view, it was *not* the work of Vyāsa, the reputed author of the Mahābhārata, because the diaskeuasts have been fortunately frank enough to admit that *his* work, the Bhārata, which originally consisted merely of 24,000 stanzas, had no episode to speak of (1. 1. 61):

> *caturviṃśatisāhasrīṃ cakre Bhāratasaṃhitām* |  
> *upākhyānair vinā tāvad Bhārataṃ procyate budhaiḥ* ||

It could again hardly have been the work of Vaiśampāyana, the direct pupil of Vyāsa, according to tradition, who is said to have recited the Bhārata of Vyāsa, in the presence of Vyāsa himself, as he had been taught by his *guru*, during the intervals of the short snake sacrifice celebrated by king Janamejaya.

The case was different with the next recorded [[P333]] recitation of the Mahābhārata: it was by the Sūta Ugraśravas in the presence of the Bhārgava Śaunaka during the twelve-year sacrifice instituted by the latter (1. 1. 1 ff; 4. 1 ff). Even before the recitation commences, Śaunaka explicitly asks the Sūta who had come there to recite his Mahābhārata, to narrate first of all the history of the Bhārgavas and, as directed by his host, the Sūta obediently does so. There is a very clear shifting of the centre of gravity. Here we have a different milieu and a different interest. The scene changes from the bustling and scintillating pageantry of the Kaurava Court to the reflective calm and leisure of the sylvan retreat of the Bhṛgus.

Few scholars, I imagine, would now be inclined to deny that our epic text has undergone momentous alterations in the course of its long and eventful history. It is now generally recognized that the Bhārata, like the popular lays, ballads and early epics of all countries and all people, has always been a *fluid* text, adjusted to the varying needs of the occasion and the differing tastes of the audience. No disparagement or condemnation of the text is thereby implied. The process is quite normal, inevitable and in a wider sense wholly right. To continue to be a vital force in the life of a progressive people, the epic must be a slow-changing book. The fact of expurgation and elaboration is only an outward indication of its being a book of inspiration and guidance in life, and not merely a book lying unused and forgotten on a dusty book-shelf. And this is no drawback in the case of our text. Therein lies on the contrary its capital interest and importance for us. It is a rapid motion picture reel of many ages of Indian culture—not necessarily factitive history—arranged in a naïve fashion: something like the sculptured panels on the gateways and the railings of the Buddhist Stupa at Sanchi or the mural frescoes of Ajanta, with scenes telescoped all in one plane, without much regard to perspective or perhaps with its own peculiar technique of perspective.

As already remarked, it seems probable that in the formative period of the epic a powerful Bhārgava influence—direct or indirect—has been at work, so to say behind the scenes, in shaping our epic for us. This element had obviously obtruded itself upon the original nucleus, certainly after the time of the original author Vyāsa and probably after that of Vaiśampāyana. The next traditional link, however, in the transmission of the epic is the Sūta. Is the Sūta then responsible for the conversion of the Bhārata into the Mahābhārata? Now I do not doubt that some of the Sūtas probably were gifted versifiers, able to compose *ex tempore* short bardic poems and to improvise lays to suit them to the varying tastes and requirements of the audience. But if we consider these Sūtas capable of composing on the spur of the moment such masses of narrative episodes and didactic discourses as we find in our Mahābhārata, we shall be crediting these minstrels with an accomplishment far beyond their natural capacity. Nobody is, however, so credulous nowadays as to imagine the Sūta as the author of those extensive innovations [[P334]] that must [72] have been necessary in order to convert a heroic poem of about 24,000 stanzas (taking the traditional figure as a rough guide for our speculations) into an encyclopaedia of the present dimensions.

We are not in any case, as far as I can see, constrained to accept every single statement of the epic in its *exact* literal sense. And when I say that, I mean no disparagement either of the text; far from it. Our epic does not pretend to be a dry, prosaic, matter-of-fact chronicle, nor a statistical history in the modern sense, based upon a laboriously compiled critical apparatus. If it were that, it would surely not have lived for 2500 years. We have on the shelves of our libraries hundreds of ponderous tomes and compendiums of national and world history, prepared along approved lines by laborious professors of history. But hardly anybody reads these works twice, and they are mostly forgotten, in a generation or two, by an understanding and ungrateful posterity. The Mahābhārata never was a scientific chronicle of that type and it would be egregious folly to regard it as such. It is above all an inspired poem. It was actually regarded by later generations as a *kāvya*:

> *kṛtaṃ mayedaṃ bhagavan kāvyaṃ paramapūjitam*,

the highest type of Indian *poetry,* like its sister epic, the Rāmāyaṇa. It was before everything else a work of art, creative art, idealistic in conception, informed with deep religious feeling, permeated by a conscious didactic purpose, focussed more on ideas and ideals than on facts and figures, in which people were not interested then so much as now; a work in which a moral was conveyed by a parable, an elusive truth by a tangible facile myth. And to the inspired creators of a traditional book of that type we must at least allow poetic licence and common imagination.

The entire story that the Sūta had heard the epic at its first recitation by Vaiśampāyana and reproduced it *verbatim* at Śaunaka's bidding, having committed it to memory after a single hearing, is so obviously unnatural and improbable that it seems clearly more appropriate to regard it merely as a poetic fiction, a "frame-story," the most popular of Indian devices of literary composition. But there is no symbolism without a basis, however difficult it may be for us to reach the elusive subconscious or unconscious. To my mind, the frame-story of our Mahābhārata is directly an unconscious admission of the fact that the Bhārata had at a critical stage of its evolution passed into the sphere of influence of the Bhṛgus, through the medium of the wandering minstrel. The Bhārgava influence is implied in the person of the Kulapati Śaunaka. The Sūta, who used to recite the poem in the Heroic Age, is kept on, with due regard to traditional usage, to give the new recension a setting appropriate to it and indicating the source at the same time.

The influence of the Bhārgavas in the narrative portion of the Great Epic is very evident and can hardly be disputed. But their influence in an entirely different sphere, though less tangible and therefore more difficult to demonstrate, is to my mind nevertheless probable: I mean the incorporation into the epic of large masses of didactic material, concentrated chiefly in the Śānti and Anuśāsana, especially so far as it concerns the Dharma and Nīti elements. Though the philosophy of the Mahābhārata is oftentimes rather shaky, being in places abstruse and confused, and though the religious beliefs which find expression there are perplexingly eclectic, oscillating between Vaiṣṇavism and Śaivism, between Henotheism and Pantheism, there can be no two opinions about the fact that the Mahābhārata offers a very sound and complete exposition of Dharma and Nīti according to Indian theorists, a feature which has given this venerable old monument of Indian antiquity its rank as Smṛti and its abiding value and interest to the Hindus, nay to all true children of Mother India.

Now it happens that Dharma and Nīti are just the two topics in which the Bhṛgus had *specialized* and with which their names are prominently associated. The connection of the Bhārgava Śukra with Nīti, which is proverbial in the Mahābhārata, is so patent that it does not need to be especially pointed out. The connection of the Bhṛgus with the Dharmaśāstra is perhaps not so well known, but is nevertheless equally certain. One has only to recall that, according to a tradition preserved in the work itself, our Manusmṛti, the most famous and popular of ancient Indian works bearing on the Dharmaśāstra, is the ancient Code of Manu in the form in which it was communicated to mankind by Bhṛgu and is therefore even commonly known as the Bhṛgusaṃhitā, an explanation which I see not the slightest reason to question or doubt.[^334_1] It is also recognized that there is intimate connection between the Mahābhārata and the Manusmṛti. The Manusmṛti, it may be pointed out, has an introduction not unlike in conception to the first chapter of our epic: a few stanzas agree to some extent even in their wording. The opinions of Manu have been frequently cited in our Mahābhārata (*ity evaṃ Manur abravīt*). According to BÜHLER'S computation, there are about 260 stanzas of the Manusmṛti, that is nearly 10 per cent. of the total, which are again found *verbatim* (or with only slight variations) in parvans 3, 12 and 13 alone of the Great Epic. Then on the side of the Mahābhārata, Dharma is the foundation on which the whole stately edifice of the Great Epic has been reared, and to a great extent also the material of which it is composed. Our Mahābhārata is itself a *dharma-grantha*. The putative hero of the epic, Yudhiṣṭhira is called Dharmarāja, himself a son of Dharma; he is Dharma incarnate. The Bhārata was a *dharma-yuddha*: *yato dharmas tato jayaḥ.* The field of battle was a *dharma-kṣetra*. Nārāyaṇa incarnated himself as Śrī-Kṛṣṇa to restore the fallen Dharma. The essence of the book (*Bhārata-sāvitrī*), embodying the moral of the story, is given as (B. 18. 5. 62 f.): [[P335]]

> *ūrdhvabāhur viraumy eṣa na ca kaścic chṛṇoti me* |  
> *dharmād arthaś ca kāmaś ca sa kimarthaṃ na sevyate* ||  
> *na jātu kāmān na bhayān na lobhād dharmaṃ tyajej jīvitasyāpi hetoḥ* |  
> *nityo dharmaḥ sukhaduḥkhe tv anitye jīvo nityo hetur asya tv anityaḥ* ||

The infiltration of masses of Bhārgava material in the shape of Bhārgava myths and legends, the manner of its treatment, and even that strange admixture of the Epic with the Dharma and Nīti elements, which latter especially has so long puzzled many inquirers into the genesis of the Mahābhārata, thus appear to find a simple and straightforward explanation in the assumption of an *important unitary diaskeuasis of the* epic *under very* strong and *direct Bhārgava influence*. But this does not at all [[P336]] imply that the text has remained untouched after this first diaskeuasis; far from it. Like all traditional works, it was a slow-changing book; and additions and alterations, as already remarked, must have been made in it continuously throughout its long history of about 2500 years.[^336_1]

These further additions were in the main probably made in the first instance by the Bhārgavas themselves in the centuries that immediately followed the first important diaskeuasis under Bhārgava supervision, since it is most likely that just as the different collections of Vedic hymns, the various Brāhmaṇas and the ritualistic manuals were all, for some time, the closely guarded property of diverse Vedic schools and families of sages, which had respectively cultivated and developed them, so also our remodelled Bhārata, now elevated to the rank of the Fifth Veda, must have remained for some time in the exclusive possession of the Bhārgavas as their close literary preserve. That would, in my opinion, account for the apparent homogeneous character of this heterogeneous mass: it all came from different hands, but out of the same mould.

If the above considerations have any validity, they might help us to lift up a corner of the thick veil enveloping our Great Epic and allow us to have a covert peep into its history. Such a peep would show that there existed in India, in very ancient times an epic poem of about 24,000 stanzas, attributed to Vyāsa (the "Expander "), which described in great detail the Bhārata War and sang the glory of the Pāṇḍavas. This heroic poem, the Bhārata, which used to be recited by the Sūtas mostly at royal courts and had in course of time become very popular, was at a critical stage of its history appropriated by the Bhṛgus (who had certainly specialized in the Dharma and Nītiśāstra and probably also developed leanings towards Viṣṇuism), with the idea of developing the epic into a vehicle of popular instruction and edification combined with entertainment. These anchorites, full of age-old [[P337]] wisdom and wonderful masters of the art of myth-weaving, took from the Sūtas the Bhārata and gave back to the world the Mahābhārata, the same book yet different. In the process of the redaction by the Bhṛgus, the work, naturally and to an extent unconsciously, received that characteristic and indelible stamp which was predetermined by the eventful history, the natural proclivities, the special endowments, and the peculiar "Weltanschauung" of the Bhṛgus. It was this little episode in its history that necessarily gave our poem the anomalous character of an Epos and "Rechtsbuch" combined. It may be surmised that this remodelled Bhārata remained for some considerable time in the hands of the Bhārgavas, who had developed it and so to say re-created it, as their exclusive literary property, and they exploited it thereafter and propagated it in their own way. The colossal success of the Bhārgava recension of the ancient Epic of the Bhāratas, a success which in one sense was richly deserved, was the indirect cause of the neglect and subsequent disappearance of the original heroic poem, which probably still existed at the time of the composition of the Āśvalāyana Gṛhya Sūtra (3. 4. 4). Like other branches of the hieratic literature, when the epic at last passed out of the hands of the Bhṛgus and became the common property of the literati of India, it still remained a fluid text, not entirely closed to minor alteration and expansion, but retained its character as a traditional work, revered and cherished by the people as the work of Maharṣi Vyāsa and serving still as a vehicle of popular education, inspiration and edification as intended by the Bhṛgus. The further we pursue the study of the traces of Bhārgava influence on the Epic of the Bhāratas, the clearer, it seems to me, will become the history of our Mahābhārata, the Great Epic of Bhāratavarṣa.

***

### Footnotes

[^334_1]: BÜHLER, *The Laws of Manu* (S. B. E. 25), p. LXXX.
[^336_1]: The most conspicuous instances of such latter additions (not found in all mss. even):  
    *Adi* 1. The Brahma-Gaṇeśa episode; 2. Kaṇikanīti; 3. Śvetakī-upākhyāna.  
    *Aranyaka* 1. Sūrya-stotra (B. 3. 3, 36-69); 2. Additions to Mārkaṇḍeya's discourse (B. add. 193-198, 200).  
    *Virāta* Durgāstotra.  
    *Bhisma* Durgāstotra.