+++
title = "43 शौर्यन् तेजो"

+++
18.43 शौर्यम् prowess; तेजः splendour; धृतः firmness; दाक्ष्यम्
dexterity; युद्धे in battle; च and; अपि also; अपलायनम् not fleeing;
दानम् generosity; ईश्वरभावः lordliness; च and; क्षात्रम् of Kshatriyas;
कर्म action; स्वभावजम् born of nature.Commentary It is the first duty of Kshatriya (man of the warrior class or of royal blood) to be brave and chivalrous. Bravery is that sublime virtue through which one is naturally strong; vigorous and courageous. In the face of the most terrible calamity the mind will not be in the least perturbed. The Kshatriya is firm under any unfavourable or trying conditions or circumstances. He does not get the least depression of spirit even when he is in adverse circumstances. It is the skill by which the reason finds out its path amidst all untoward circumstances and eventually attains its goal. This is firmness; fortitude or courage.Dakshya Promptness He is able to decide rightly on the spot in matters that deman prompt attention doing without confusion; of duties which present themselves all of a sudden and demand prompt action.As the sunflower always turns its face towards the sun so does he always face his enemies. He will ever avoid turning his back to them on the field of battle. He is absolutely fearless. Just as a tree gives away its flowers and fruits freely to whoever desires them; as the jasmine sends out its sweet fragrace in every direction; so will a Kshatriya generously give to another whatever may be asked of him. His charity is boundless.Lordliness A Kshatriya king enjoys sovereignty over his subjects owing to the sure protection he grants them; exercises ruling power over his subjects who are to be ruled; and raises the rod of chastisement to punish the unrighteous or the wicked.
