+++
title = "54 ब्रह्मभूतः प्रसन्नात्मा"

+++
18.54 ब्रह्मभूतः having become Brahman; प्रसन्नात्मा sereneminded; न
not; शोचति (he) grieves; न not; काङ्क्षति desires; समः the same; सर्वेषु
all; भूतेषु in beings; मद्भक्तिम् devotion unto Me; लभते obtains; पराम्
supreme.Commentary Brahmabhutah Having attained to Brahman. His attainment of perfect freedom or oneness with the Supreme is described in the next verse.He is tranilminded. He is in a state of balance and eanimity. There is nothing connected with the little personality that may cause him to grieve or prompt him to feel desire. When this state is attained; the multiplicity of objects gradually disappears and he perceives only unity everywhere. The waking and dream consciousness that gives rise to false knowledge gradually passes away.He does not grieve about his bodily wants. If he fails in his attempt to fulfil them; he does not grieve either. He always keeps evenness of mind in success and failure. He has no longing for any object that is not attained.Na sochati na kankshati can also be interpreted as he neither grieves nor exults.Samah sarveshu bhuteshu may also mean he puts himself in the position of others and feels for others. If anyone is in acute agony or distress; he himself feels that he is affected. His heart is very tender and soft. He is extremely compassionate and merciful. He considers that the pleasure and pain of all beings are his own. If others rejoice he also rejoices if others are in distress; he also is distressed. His heart is so much expanded that he feels for all. Jealousy; narrowness of heart; pettymindedness; the idea of separateness; all barriers that separate man from man; prejudices of all sorts and dislike for others --
all vanished in toto. He has cosmic love. He is a cosmic benefactor. He is the friend of all. This state of expansion is beyond description. One has to experience it for oneself. Such a devotee or aspirant attains supreme devotion to Me; the fourth or the highest of the four kinds of devotion mentioned in verse 16 of chapter VII; viz.; devotion of knowledge of the man of wisdom. (Cf.II.70)
