+++
title = "5 RETROSPECT"
+++

In the course of these lectures it has been my endeavour to demonstrate that there are three clear perspectives from which the Mahabharata can be viewed. There is the matter-of-fact viewpoint. On this material or mundane plane, it is the lively story of a fierce war of annihilation said to be waged between two families of cousins, which ends in the victory of one of the claimants to the throne, a story which in all probability is not entirely an invention but has some historical basis, which is however, entirely in the background. On the mundane plane, from end to end, the main interest of the poem is held and centred on character.

Next there is what may be called the Dharmic viewpoint. On this ethical plane, the war is regarded as a conflict between the principles of Dharma and Adharma, the Pandavas standing for Dharma, the Kauravas for Adharma, they being the incarnations of the Devas and the Asuras respectively, and the war ends in the victory of Dharma (*yato dharmas tato jayaḥ*).

There is, thirdly and lastly, the transcendental or metaphysical viewpoint. This aspect of the story is only suggested and gains in interest and importance by being that, having all the power and beauty of a *chiaroscuro* from the brush of a master painter, which produces its ethereal effects by the power of suggestion. On this transcendental plane, which is the viewpoint beyond Dharma and Adharma, beyond Good and Evil, the epic develops what may be termed the philosophy of the Self, which may properly be regarded as an attempt at a synthesis of life. In doing this, the epic poets stage a war between the Higher Self and the lower self of man, symbolized by the family of cousins, who are fighting for the sovereignty over the kingdom of the body. In this conflict the Superman (Arjuna) under the guidance of the Superself (Śrī Kṛṣṇa), acquiring insight into the nature and character of his own self and realizing the fundamental identity between the individual self and the Superself, cleaves with the sword of knowledge his own ignorance, manifested in the shape of all the illegitimate desires and doubts, passions and prejudices, ideas and idiosyncrasies, which had crystallized round him in the course of his separate existence and which he had falsely considered as innately and intimately belonging to himself, as an inalienable and indivisible part of his own personality, his own individuality, his own being:

> *tasmād ajñānasaṁbhūtaṁ hṛtsthaṁ jñānāsinātmanaḥ /  
> chittvainam saṁśayaṁ yogam atiṣṭhottiṣṭha Bhārata //  
> — Gītā 4.42*

[[P122]] Projected on to the material or mundane plane, these various ligaments which bind the self are made visible, embodied as relatives, teachers, elders, and friends, whom Arjuna sees from his central position, ranged on one side of the Kurukṣetra, and whom he finds so difficult to face and to kill. His illusion destroyed, the individual self becomes ready to obey unhesitatingly the behests and to accomplish joyously the work of the Superself as his chosen instrument.

Bhagavan Śrī Kṛṣṇa always exhorts Arjuna to become a Yogi. The Yogi intellectually realizes that the universe is one, that he cannot escape from the relationship that unites him to everything that exists, nor from the continuity which joins him to the past, the present and the future. The Yogi, who is self-aware, is characterized by equipoise, accepts the universe with an enthusiastic gladness, whole and as it is, realizing the immense possibilities which it holds. He accepts it not only with his mind, his reason, but with his whole being. The way of the Yogi is the hardest, demanding as it does greatest love, courage, freedom, and self-mastery.

The keynote of the philosophy of the Mahabharata, which is identical with the philosophy of the Gītā, is *samatva*. It is the essence of Yoga, the heart's heart of Yoga, so that in the Gītā *samatva* is identified with yoga (*samatvaṁ yoga ucyate*—Gītā 2.48). The meaning of *samatva* can be seen only by careful observation of its use, a point we cannot go into here. It means something like [[equablesness|equableness]], harmony, balance. Balance of what? It is evidently balance of personality that is meant. The man who is *sama* clearly does not try to fly from the world. Worldly life brings a multitude of marvellous experiences, most precious, not to be missed at any cost, but not to be utterly absorbed in. The way of life of the Yogi, who has attained *samatva*, affects his whole personality, bringing into their right and balanced relationship the functions of reason and will and emotion. He walks evenly among the beauties and the perils of the world—like Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa in our epic or his human counterpart, Arjuna; you have to think of the two as one—feeling the love, joy, anger and the rest. In fact he runs through the whole gamut of emotions, and through it all he preserves his balance, equipoise, aloofness, like a scientist watching objectively the results of the ever new experiments he arranges, able to control the materials but not the results.

To put it yet more simply, the Mahabharata embodies the spirit of Yogic Idealism, that is, of feeling the value and wonder of life and being desirous of making it a better thing; and further, with that end in view, to combine the spirit of intense enjoyment with a tempering wisdom, perfect control and natural equipoise,—going into seas of experience steered by *samatva*. That is active renunciation, the *leitmotiv* of the Mahābhārata. The doctrine is enunciated formally in the Gītā, and illustrated in a lively and picturesque manner in the story.

The epic poets, we find, are using every means in their power to expound, illustrate and popularize what we might for short call the Philosophy of the Self, a lofty philosophy of ethical autonomy, [[unparallelled|unparalleled]] for its boldness and comprehensiveness, and to convey their message of moral duty and hope, with emphasis on the application of these principles to the problems of daily life.

[[P123]] When we realize these facts, questions as to the historicity of the polyandrous marriage of Draupadī, or the precise ethnic affinities of the Pandavas, or the exact date of the Mahābhārata War, of the origin and development of the epic—these and other favourite topics of academic wrangling—lose some of their glamour and cease to engross us. They are legitimate questions no doubt and not totally devoid of interest. But we must realize that while disputing about them, we are still on the periphery of this mighty work, which is primarily concerned with finding a solution to the problem of evil in life, nay, to the problem of existence itself.

On account of the rapidly shifting planes of perspective of the vast canvass on which the epic poets operate in developing their three-dimensional theme, the construction of the story has naturally become very complex, and its form has given rise in modern times to many amusing misconceptions and to some grotesque theories. But I can assure you that there is no serious contradiction or inconsistency in the work, as you may have been led to believe from a cursory perusal of it. I hope I have succeeded in showing you that the Mahabharata, which may have started as an epic, has certainly not ended in becoming a chaos, as OLDENBERG imagined. It would be a pardonable hyperbole to say that it has ended in becoming the cosmos, as it very modestly says of itself:

> *yad ihāsti tad anyatra yan nehāsti na tat kvacit /*

"What is in this work may be found elsewhere, but what is not in this work is to be found nowhere"!

[[P124]] The chaos which modern critics think they see in the Great Epic of India is but a reflex of the state of their own mind and not in the work at all, which on the other hand is a mighty pulsating work, clothing in noble language and with pleasing imagery a profound and universal philosophy, a glowing and rhythmic synthesis of life.

---

[[P125]]

