+++
title = "12 मोघाशा मोघकर्माणो"

+++
9.12 मोघाशाः of vain hopes; मोघकर्माणः of vain actions; मोघज्ञानाः of vain knowledge; विचेतसः senseless; राक्षसीम् devilish; आसुरीम् undivine;
च and; एव verily; प्रकृतिम् nature; मोहिनीम् deceitful; श्रिताः (are)
possessed of.Commentary They entertain vain hopes; for there can be no hope in perishable forms. It is vain hope because they run after transient objects and miss the Eternal. It is vain action; because it is not performed by them as sacrifice unto the Lord. The Agnihotra (a ritual) and other actions performed by them are fruitless; because they insult the Lord. They are senseless. They have no,discrimination. They have no idea of the eternal Self. They worship their body only. They behold no self beyond the body. They neglect their own Self. They do atrocious crimes and cruel actions. They rob others property and murder people. They partake of the nature of the demons and the undivine beings.The Rakshasa are Tamasic and the Asuras are Rajasic.Prakriti means here Svabhava (ones own nature).They see the external human body only. They have no knowledge of the Self that dwells within the body.
They do not behold God in the universe. They life for eating and drinking only.He who entertains hope of getting the rewards of actions through mere Karma alone; without the grace of the Lord is one of empty hope and empty deed. Karmas are insentient. They cannot give rewards independently. The omniscient Lord Who knows the relationship between Karmas and their fruits can dispense them. He who has obtained knowledge from books which do not admit of the existence of the Self and which do not speak of the Self is one of empty knowledge. This will not give any reward. That knowledge obtained through the study of spiritual books which treat of Brahman alone can give the reward. (Cf.VII.15XVI.6;20)
