+++
title = "19 तपाम्यहमहं वर्षम्"

+++
9.19 तपामि give heat; अहम् I; अहम् I; वर्षम् rain; निगृह्णामि withhold;
उत्सृजामि send forth; च and; अमृतम् immortality; च and; एव also; मृत्युः
death; च and; सत् existence; असत् nonexistence; च and; अहम् I; अर्जुन O Arjuna.Commentary I radiate heat in the form of the sun. I send forth the rain in the form of Indra in the rainy season and I take it back during the rest of the year.Sat Existence; the manifested world (the effect).Asat Nonexistence; the unmanifested (the cause).Nonexistence does not mean nothingness. The subtle; unmanifested cause is spoken of as nonexitence. The Self or Brahman or the Eternal can never be altogether nonexistence. It always exists. It is Existence Absolute. If you say that the subtle unmanifested cause is nothing; it is impossible to conceive existence coming out of nothing. The Chhandogya Upanishad asks; How can existence come out of nonexistence It is simply absurd to conceive that existence has arisen out of nonexistence (nothing).For a Vedantin ( student or follower of Vedanta) Brahman (the Absolute) is Sat
(existence) because It always exists and because It is unchanging. This manifested world is Asat or unreal. For the worldlyminded people who have neither understanding nor knowledge of Brahman; who are endowed with gross and impure mind; who do not have a sharp and subtle intellect; and who ca perceive the gross forms only; this manifested world is the Sat and the subtle unmanifested MulaPrakriti (the primordial Nature); the cause of this manifested world; is Asat. For them Brahman also is Asat. The unmanifested refers to MulaPrakriti and Para Brahman also because both are hidden.Every object has three states;
viz.; the gross (Sthula); the subtle (Sukshma) and the causal (Karana).
Mahakarana (the great causeless cause) is Para Brahman. The gross and the subtle states are the effects of Karana. What you see outside is the physical body. This physical body is moved by the astral (the subtle)
body made up of the mind; liferoce and the senses. The causal body is the seedbody. From this seedbody have sprung the subtle and the gross bodies. Take the case of an orange. The outer skin is its physical body the inner pulp or essence is the subtle body the innermost causal body which gives rise to the pulp and the outer skin is the seed. This is only a gross illustration. The orange has got another kind of subtle and causal bodies. The worldlyminded man beholds the physical body only and takes this as the Truth. For him; the astral and the causal bodies are unreal.
