+++
title = "22 श्री भगवानुवाच"

+++
14.22 प्रकाशम् light; च and; प्रवृत्तिम् activity; च and; मोहम्
delusion; एव even; च and; पाण्डव O Arjuna; न not; द्वेष्टि hates;
सम्प्रवृत्तानि (when) gone forth; न not; निवृत्तानि when absent;
काङ्क्षति longs.Commentary This is the answer to Arjunas first estion.
Light is the effect of Sattva; activity of Rajas and delusion of Tamas.
The liberated sage does not hate them when they are present. When Sattva shines he is not carried away by pride. He does not think; I am a vey learned man. When the impulse for action is awakened in the body or when there is a divine call for him to do work for the solidarity of the world (Lokasangraha) he does not hate any action and he does not regret it after the action is accomplished. He feels no remorse while performing actions. The work is like the play of a child. While inertia increases in him; he is not deluded by infatuation.Only an ignorant man thinks Tamas has entered into me. I am deluded. I am under the influence of heedlessness; torpor; sloth; laziness and indolence. Now I am under the influence of Rajas. I am forced to do activities. This is painful. I have fallen from my true nature. This gives me a lot of pain. Now Sattva predominates in me. I am attached to happiness and knowledge. I am proud of my learning and better status.The liberated sage who has transcended the Gunas does not thus hate them when they are present.A man of Sattva or Rajas or Tamas longs for light; action or inertia which first manifested themselves and disappeared. But a liberated sage or one who has gone beyond the three alities does not at all long for these states which have vanished. This mark or characteristic is an internal mental state. It cannot be perceived or detected by others. It can be felt by ones own self alone. If one is endowed with clairvoyant vision or the inner eye of intuition; he can directly behold the longins that arise in the mind of another man.In the following three verses the Lord gives His answer to Arjunas second estion What is the conduct of the sage who has crossed over the Gunas
