+++
title = "23 शक्नोतीहैव यः"
+++

<details><summary>आदिदेवानन्दः</summary>

5.23 He who is able, even here, before he is released from the body, to bear the impulse generated by desire and wrath, he is a Yogin (competent for self-realisation); he is the happy man.
</details>

<details><summary>गम्भीरानन्दः</summary>

5.23 One who can withstand here itself-before departing from the body-the impulse arising from desire and anger, that man is a yogi; he is happy.
</details>

<details><summary>पुरोहितस्वामी</summary>

5.23 He who, before he leaves his body, learns to surmount the promptings of desire and anger is a saint and is happy.
</details>

<details><summary>शङ्करनारायणः</summary>

5.23. He, whose pleasure, delight and again light are just within-O son of Prtha ! he attains the supreme Yoga, himself becoming the Brahman.
</details>

<details><summary>शिवानन्दः - अनुवादः</summary>

5.23 He who is able, while still here (in this world) to withstand,
before the liberation from the body, the impulse born out of desire and anger he is a Yogi, he is a happy man.
</details>

<details><summary>शिवानन्दः - टीका</summary>

5.23 शक्नोति is able; इह here (in this world); एव even; यः who; सोढुम्
to withstand; प्राक् before; शरीरविमोक्षणात् liberation from the body;
कामक्रोधोद्भवम् born out of desire and anger; वेगम् the impulse; सः he;
युक्तः united; सः he; सुखी happy; नरः man.Commentary Yukta means harmonised or steadfast in Yoga or selfabiding.Desire and anger are powerful enemies of peace. It is very difficult to annihilate them. You will have to make very strong efforts to destroy these enemies.When the word Kama (desire) is used in a general sense it includes all sorts of desires. It means lust in a special sense.While still here means while yet living. The impulse of desire is the agitation of the mind which is indicated by hairs standing on end and cheerful face. The impulse of anger is agitation of the mind which is indicated by fiery eyes;
perspiration; biting of the lips and trembling of the body. In this verse you will clearly understand that he who has controlled desire and anger is the most happy man in this world; nor he who has immense wealth; a beautiful wife and beautiful children. Therefore you must try your level best to eradicate desire and anger; the dreadful enemies of eternal bliss.Kama (desire) is longing for a pleasant and agreeable object which gives pleasure and which is seen; heard of; or remembered.
Anger is aversion towards an unpleasant and disagreeable object which gives pain and which is seen; heard or; or remembered.A Yogi controls the impulse born of desire and anger; destroyes the currents of likes and dislikes,and attains to eanimity of the mind; by resting in the innermost Self; and so he is very happy.(Cf.VI.18)
</details>
