+++
title = "08 आयुःसत्त्वबलारोग्यसुखप्रीतिविवर्धनाः"

+++
17.8 आयुःसत्त्वबलारोग्यसुखप्रीतिविवर्धनाः those which increase Ayus
(life); Sattva (purity); Bala (strength); Arogya (health); Sukha (joy);
Priti (cheerfulness and good appetite); रस्याः savoury; स्निग्धाः
oleaginous; स्थिराः substantial; हृद्याः agreeable; आहाराः the foods;
सात्त्विकप्रियाः are dear to Sattvic (pure).Commentary Pure food increases the vitality and strength of those who eat it. It augments the energy of the mind also.Sattva Cheerfulness purity inner; moral and spiritual strength and courage that keep the mind steady even in great distress.Bala Strength absence of fatigue even in doing difficult work.Priti Absence of retching good appetite.Rasyah Sweet and juicy.Sthirah Substantial which can last long in the body vitalising but not difficult to digest.Hridyah The mere sight of the food is very pleasing to the mind and it is free from odour of smoke or burnt condition.Sattvic food produces cheerfulness; serenity and mental clarity and helps the aspirants to enter into deep meditation and maintain mental poise and nervous eilibrium. It supplies the maximum energy to the body and the mind. It is very easily assimilated and absorbed.A Sattvic man relishes juicy food and other foods which are attractive in form; soft to touch and pleasant to taste; which are small in bulk but great in nourishment like the words from the lips of a spiritual preceptor. Sattvic food is highly conducive to health.Eat that food which will develop Sattva in you. Milk; butter; fresh; ripe fruits;
almonds; green Dal; barley; Parwal; Torai; Karela; plantains; etc.; are Sattvic. Abandon fish; meat; liors; eggs; etc.; ruthlessly if you want to increase Sattva and attain Selfrealisation. The mind is formed of the subtle portion of the food. जैसा अन्न वैसा मन As is the food so is the mind says a Hindi proverb. If you take Sattvic food; the mind also will be Sattvic. The seven elements (Dhatus) of the body (Chyle; blood;
flesh; fat; bone; marrow and semen) are formed out of food.Ideas or concepts are generated in the mind corresponding to these seven elements. As is the constitution of these elements; so is the constitution of the mind. Just as water is rendered hot when the pot that contains it is placed over the fire; so also the nature and constitution of the mind is according to the nature and constitution of the food or the seven elements.
