+++
title = "11 न हि"

+++
18.11 न not; हि verily; देहभृता by an embodied being; शक्यम् possible;
त्यक्तुम् to abandon; कर्माणि actions; अशेषतः entirely; यः who; तु but;
कर्मफलत्यागी relinisher of the fruits of actions; सः he; त्यागी
relinisher; इति thus; अभिधीयते is called.Commentary He who has assumed a human body and yet grumbles at having to perform actions is verily a fool. Can fire that is endowed with heat as its natural property ever think of getting rid of it So long as you are living in this body you cannot entirely relinish action. Lord Krishna says to Arjuna Nor can anyone; even for an instant remain actionless for helplessly is everyone driven to action by the alities born of Nature (Cf.III.5). Nature (and your own nature; too) will urge you to do actions. You will have to abandon the idea of agency and the fruits of actions. Then you are ite safe. No action will bind you.The ignorant man who identifies himself with the body and who thinks that he is himself the doer of all actions should not abandon actions. It is impossible for him to relinish actions. He will have to perform all the prescribed duties while relinishing their fruits.Dehabhrita A wearer of the body An embodied being; i.e.; he who identifies himself with the body. A man who has discrimination between the Real and the unreal; the Eternal and the transient; cannot be called a bodywearer; because he does not think that he is the doer of actions -- vide chapter II.21 (He who knows Him Who is indestructible; eternal; unborn; undiminishing -- how can that man slay;
O Arjuna; or cause to be slain).When the ignorant man who is alified for action does the prescribed duties; relinishing the desire for the fruits of his actions; he is called a Tyagi; although he is active. This title Tyagi is given to him for the sake of courtesy.The relinishment of all actions is possible only for him who has attained Selfrealisation and who is; therefore; not a wearer of the body; i.e.; does not hink that the body is the Self. (Cf.III.5)
