+++
title = "01 श्री भगवानुवाच"

+++
  
  
9.1 इदम् this; तु indeed; ते to thee; गुह्यतमम् greatest secret;
प्रवक्ष्यामि (I) shall declare; अनसूयवे to one who does not cavil;
ज्ञानम् knowledge; विज्ञानसहितम् combined with experience; यत् which;
ज्ञात्वा having known; मोक्ष्यसे thou shalt be free; अशुभात् from evil.Commentary Idam (this) alludes to knowledge of the Self.Jnana Theoretical knowledge of Brahman through the study of the Upanishads;
also known as Paroksha Brahma Jnana.Vijnana Direct intuitive perception of Brahman or AtmaSakshatkara; also known as Aparoksha Brahma Jnana.This alone forms the direct means of attaining to liberation from evil or the bondage of Samsara; freedom from birth and death.The knowledge of the Self is the most profound secret. It can hardly be described in words.
It can be realised only through direct experience or spiritual intuition. Atman or Brahman or the selfluminous; eternal; Supreme Purusha is ever shining in the chambers of the hearts of men. Throughout the ages there have always been a few who have trodden the spiritual path and found out this secret or the spiritual treasure of the precious pearl of the Self. Knowledge of the Self is the only direct means for attaining liberation; Karma Yoga purifies the heart and leads to the dawn of the knowledge of the Self.Lord Krishna says; O Arjuna; I shall teach you this profoundest secret knowledge combined with realisation as you are free from jealousy. From this we can clearly understand that freedom from jealousy is an important alification for an aspirant.
Knowledge can only dawn in a mind which is free from all forms of jealousy which causes great distraction of the mind and produces intense heartburning. Matsarya (malicious envy); Irshya (jealous of others prosperity or happiness) and Asuya (envious or indignant over the merits of another) are all varieties of jealousy. If you superimpose evil alities on a virtuous man who really does not possess these alities on a virtuous man who really does not possess these alities and speak ill of him; this is jealousy (Asuya). To behold evil or to look at a person with the faultfinding evil eye; and to see evil in him who is free from any kind of fault and who is virtuous is Asyua. Jealousy is only pettymindedness. This is a modification of ignorance. It can be eradicated by eniry of the nature of the Self and cultivating its opposite alities; viz.; nobility; broad and universal tolerance;
magnanimity and largeheartedness.To thee who does not carp or cavil This implies that Arjuna was endowed with all the virtues of a disciple such as straightforwardness; selfcontrol; restraint of the senses; serenity of mind; discrmination; dispassion; etc. This is the Upalakshana (the truth alluded to where only a part is stated) and Asuya is the Upalakshaka (the hint which alludes to the Upalakshana).
