+++
title = "27 यत्करोषि यदश्नासि"

+++
9.27 यत् whatever; करोषि thou doest; यत् whatever; अश्नासि thou eatest;
यत् whatever; जुहोषि thou offerest in sacrifice; ददासि thou givest; यत्
whatever; यत् whatever; तपस्यसि thou practisest as austerity; कौन्तेय O Kaunteya; तत् that; कुरुष्व do; मदर्पणम् offering unto Me.Commentary Consecrate all acts to the Lord. Then you will be freed from the bondage of Karma. You will have freedom in action. He who tries to live in the spirit of this verse will be able to do selfsurrender unto the Lord.
Gradually he ascends the spiritual path step by step. His greedy nature is slowly dissolved now. He always gives. He is not eager to take. His whole life with all its actions; thoughts and feelings; is dedicated to the service of the Lord eventually. He lives for the Lord only. He works for the Lord only. There is not a bit of egoism now. His whole nature is transformed into divinity. When actions are dedicated to the Lord; there is no rirth for you. This is the simplest method of Yoga. Do not waste your time any longer. Take it up from today.All actions; all results and all rewards will go to the Lord. There is no separte living for the individual. Just as the river joins the sea abandoning its own name and form so also the individual soul joins the Supreme Soul giving up his own name and form; his own egoistic desires and egoism. The individual will has become one with the cosmic will.Whatever thou doest of thy own sweet will; whatever thou offerest in sacrifice as enjoined in the scriptures; whatever thou givest -- such things as gold; rice; ghee;
clothes; etc.; to the Brahmins and others -- whatever austerity such as the ChandrayanaVrata (to destroy sin); control of the senses; etc.; thou doest; do thou all these as an offering unto Me. (Cf.V.32XII.6and8)Now listen to what you will gain by doing thus.
