+++
title = "11 तेषामेवानुकम्पार्थमहमज्ञानजन्"
+++

<details><summary>आदिदेवानन्दः</summary>

10.11 Out of compassion for them alone, I, abiding in their mental activity as its object, dispel the darkness born of ignorance by the brilliant lamp of knowledge.
</details>

<details><summary>गम्भीरानन्दः</summary>

10.11 Out of compassion for them alone, I, residing in their hearts,
destroy the darkness born of ignorance with the luminous lamp of Knowledge.
</details>

<details><summary>पुरोहितस्वामी</summary>

10.11 By My grace, I live in their hearts; and I dispel the darkness of ignorance by the shining light of wisdom.
</details>

<details><summary>शङ्करनारायणः</summary>

10.11. Out of compassion only towards these men, I, who remain as their very Self, destroy with teh shining light of wisdom, their darkness born of ignorance,
</details>

<details><summary>शिवानन्दः - अनुवादः</summary>

10.11 Out of mere compassion for them, I, dwelling within their Self,
destroy the darkness born of ignorance by the luminous lamp of knowledge.
</details>

<details><summary>शिवानन्दः - टीका</summary>

10.11 तेषाम् for them; एव mere; अनुकम्पार्थम् out of compassion; अहम् I;
अज्ञानजम् born of ignorance; तमः darkness; नाशयामि (I) destroy;
आत्मभावस्थः dwelling within their self; ज्ञानदीपेन by the lamp of knowledge; भास्वता luminous.Commentary Luminous lamp of knowledge The Lord dwells in the heart of the devotees who constantly think of Him and destroys the veil or the darkness born of ignorance due to the absence of discrimination; by the luminous lamp of knowledge fed by the oil of pure devotion; fanned by the wind of profound meditation on Him;
provided with the wick of right intuition; generated by the constant cultivation of celibacy; piety and other divine virtues held in the chambers of the heart free from worldliness; placed in the innermost recesses of the mind free from the wind of senseattractions (withdrawn from the objects of the senses) and untainted by likes and dislikes; and shining with the light of knowledge of the Self caused by the constant practice of meditation.The lamp is not in need of an instrument or means or any sort of practice for the removal of darkness. The generation of the light itself is ite sufficient to remove the darkness. As soon as the darkness is removed by the light; the pot; the chair and the other articles are seen. Even so the dawn of knowledge of the Self itself is ite sufficient to remove ignorance. No other Karma or,practice is necessary. After the ignorance is removed by the knowledge of the Self;
Brahman alone shines in Its pristine glory.
</details>
