+++
title = "10 काममाश्रित्य दुष्पूरम्"

+++
16.10 कामम् desire; आश्रित्य abiding in; दुष्पूरम् insatiable;
दम्भमानमदान्विताः full of hypocrisy; pride and,arrogance; मोहात् through delusion; गृहीत्वा having held; असद्ग्राहान् evil ideas; प्रवर्तन्ते
they work; अशुचिव्रताः with impure resolves.Commentary These soulless malevolent persons perform cruel and sinful actions. Their minds are saturated with vanity; conceit and arrogance. They entertain in their minds unholy resolves and unreasonable ideas. They harbour insatiable desires in their hearts. Just as a monkey becomes more and more intoxicated if wine if given to it; so also the older they grow the more and more arrogant and lustful do they become. They cause the ruin and death of those around them. They boast of their own actions and treat others with great contempt. They are very much attached to their bodies.
They worship their bodies. Their passion is boundless. They are stupid and obstinate and so they have no firm determination.Desire is insatiable like fire. Enjoyment cannot bring about satisfaction of the desires. The more you enjoy; the stronger does the desire become. After an object is enjoyed; there springs up a desire to continue the enjoyment for ever. You take recourse to all sorts of devices to preserve the objects.Although a man is not righteous he pretends to be a man of righteousness. This is hypocrisy. Although a man is not worthy of being honoured; he claims to be so. This is Mana (pride). There is false dignity. Although a man does not possess great things he superimposes them on himself. This is Mada.These Asuras make impure resolves. I will worship such and such a deity by repeating such and such a Mantra and get hold of such and such a woman. I will repeat such and such a Mantra and kill such and such a man.
