+++
title = "17 आत्मसम्भाविताः स्तब्धा"

+++
16.17 आत्मसम्भाविताः selfconceited; स्तब्धाः stubborn; धनमानमदान्विताः
filled with the pride and intoxication of wealth; यजन्ते (they) perform;
नामयज्ञैः sacrifices in name; ते they; दम्भेन out of ostentation;
अविधिपूर्वकम् contrary to scriptural ordinances.Commentary They are puffed up with unbounded pride. They esteem themselves very highly. They are not esteemed or honoured as such by the righteous or pious persons.
They have a very high opinion of their own greatness. They esteem themselves as possessed of all the virtuous attributes. They are not humble. They have no humility or meekness. Their minds are entirely filled with a sense of their own importance. They treat others with contempt. They think that others are inferior to them. They never bend their heads and make prostrations to elders or superiors or spiritual teachers and monks. They stand erect like a pillar or iron post;
intoxicated as they are with the wine of wealth. They pretend to perform Yajnas.They do not care for an altar; a sacrifical bower or a receptacle for the fire; or any of the proper materials to be used in the sacrifices. They do not pay any attention to the prescribed rules. They do sacrifices in order to increase their own fame. They will not hear even the mentioning of the name of God or Brahmana. How can God or a Brahmana attend their sacrifices They perform sacrifices without paying attention to the several parts of them and the obligations enjoined in the scriptural ordinances such as the recitation of the Mantras; worship of the gods; giving of the fees; etc. They will not do the sacrifices with reverence and faith. They want that all the people should say that they are Somayajis (performers of the Soma sacrifice). They will not attain the fruits of the sacrifice. There is no idea of service in them.
They perform sacrifice to deceive the world; but not out of sincerity and faith.Mana Pride consists in supposing oneself worthy of a high honour (on account of ones wealth or learning; etc.).Mada On account of intoxication of wealth the wealthy man treats the Guru and other persons who are worthy of being honoured; with contempt. Wealth and learning turn their heads. This is Mada.
